WEBVTT
Kind: captions
Language: en


 
the<


the following is a conversation with
 


the following is a conversation with
Marcus<


Marcus hunter senior research scientists
 


Marcus hunter senior research scientists
the<


the google deepmind throughout his
 


the google deepmind throughout his
career<


career of research including with
 


career of research including with
Juergen<


Juergen Smith Huber and Shayne leg he
 


Juergen Smith Huber and Shayne leg he
has<


has proposed a lot of interesting ideas
 


has proposed a lot of interesting ideas
in<


in and around the field of artificial
 


in and around the field of artificial
general<


general intelligence including the
 


general intelligence including the
development<


development of IHC spelled a ixi model
 


development of IHC spelled a ixi model
which<


which is a mathematical approach to AGI
 


which is a mathematical approach to AGI
that<


that incorporates ideas of Kolmogorov
 


that incorporates ideas of Kolmogorov
complexity<


complexity solomonoff induction and
 


complexity solomonoff induction and
reinforcement<


reinforcement learning in 2006
 


reinforcement learning in 2006
Marcus<


Marcus launched the 50,000 euro hütter
 


Marcus launched the 50,000 euro hütter
prize<


prize for lossless compression of human
 


prize for lossless compression of human
knowledge<


knowledge the idea behind this prize is
 


knowledge the idea behind this prize is
that<


that the ability to compress well is
 


that the ability to compress well is
closely<


closely related to intelligence this to
 


closely related to intelligence this to
me<


me is a profound idea specifically if
 


me is a profound idea specifically if
you<


you can compress the first 100 megabytes
 


you can compress the first 100 megabytes
or<


or 1 gigabyte of Wikipedia better than
 


or 1 gigabyte of Wikipedia better than
your<


your predecessors your compressor likely
 


your predecessors your compressor likely
has<


has to also be smarter the intention of
 


has to also be smarter the intention of
this<


this prize is to encourage the
 


this prize is to encourage the
development<


development of intelligent compressors
 


development of intelligent compressors
as<


as a path to AGI in conjunction with
 


as a path to AGI in conjunction with
this<


this podcast release just a few days ago
 


this podcast release just a few days ago
Markus<


Markus announced the 10x increase in
 


Markus announced the 10x increase in
several<


several aspects of the surprise
 


several aspects of the surprise
including<


including the money to 500,000 euros the
 


including the money to 500,000 euros the
better<


better your compressor works relative to
 


better your compressor works relative to
the<


the previous winners the higher fraction
 


the previous winners the higher fraction
of<


of that prize money is awarded to you
 


of that prize money is awarded to you
you<


you can learn more about it if you
 


you can learn more about it if you
Google<


Google simply Qatar prize I have a big
 


Google simply Qatar prize I have a big
fan<


fan of benchmarks for developing AI
 


fan of benchmarks for developing AI
systems<


systems and the harder prize may indeed
 


systems and the harder prize may indeed
be<


be one that will spark some good ideas
 


be one that will spark some good ideas
for<


for approaches that will make progress
 


for approaches that will make progress
on<


on the path of developing a GI systems
 


on the path of developing a GI systems
this<


this is the artificial intelligence
 


this is the artificial intelligence
podcast<


podcast if you enjoy it subscribe on
 


podcast if you enjoy it subscribe on
YouTube<


YouTube give it five stars an Apple
 


YouTube give it five stars an Apple
podcast<


podcast supported on patreon or simply
 


podcast supported on patreon or simply
connect<


connect with me on Twitter at lex
 


connect with me on Twitter at lex
Friedman<


Friedman spelled Fri D M am as usual
 


Friedman spelled Fri D M am as usual
I'll<


I'll do one or two minutes of ads now
 


I'll do one or two minutes of ads now
and<


and never any ads in the middle that can
 


and never any ads in the middle that can
break<


break the flow of the conversation I
 


break the flow of the conversation I
hope<


hope that works for you and doesn't hurt
 


hope that works for you and doesn't hurt
the<


the listening experience
 


the listening experience
this<


this show is presented by cash app the
 


this show is presented by cash app the
number<


number one finance app in the App Store
 


number one finance app in the App Store
when<


when you get it
 


when you get it
use<


use collects podcast cash app lets you
 


use collects podcast cash app lets you
send<


send money to friends buy Bitcoin and
 


send money to friends buy Bitcoin and
invest<


invest in the stock market with as
 


invest in the stock market with as
little<


little as one dollar brokerage services
 


little as one dollar brokerage services
that<


that provided by cash up investing a
 


that provided by cash up investing a
subsidiary<


subsidiary of square and member s IPC
 


subsidiary of square and member s IPC
since<


since cash app allows you to send and
 


since cash app allows you to send and
receive<


receive money digitally peer-to-peer and
 


receive money digitally peer-to-peer and
security<


security in all digital transactions
 


security in all digital transactions
very<


very important let me mention the PCI
 


very important let me mention the PCI
data<


data security standard that cash app is
 


data security standard that cash app is
compliant<


compliant with big fan of standards for
 


compliant with big fan of standards for
safety<


safety and security PCI DSS is a good
 


safety and security PCI DSS is a good
example<


example of that or a bunch of
 


example of that or a bunch of
competitors<


competitors got together and agreed that
 


competitors got together and agreed that
there<


there needs to be a global standard
 


there needs to be a global standard
around<


around the security of transactions now
 


around the security of transactions now
we<


we just need to do the same for
 


we just need to do the same for
autonomous<


autonomous vehicles and AI systems in
 


autonomous vehicles and AI systems in
general<


general so again if you get cash out
 


general so again if you get cash out
from<


from the App Store or Google Play and
 


from the App Store or Google Play and
use<


use the code Lex
 


use the code Lex
Podcast<


Podcast you'll get ten dollars and cash
 


Podcast you'll get ten dollars and cash
app<


app will also donate ten dollars the
 


app will also donate ten dollars the
first<


first one of my favorite organizations
 


first one of my favorite organizations
that<


that is helping to advance robotics and
 


that is helping to advance robotics and
STEM<


STEM education for young people around
 


STEM education for young people around
the<


the world and now here's my conversation
 


the world and now here's my conversation
with<


 
 


 
as<


as a computer or maybe an information
 


as a computer or maybe an information
processing<


processing system let's go with a big
 


processing system let's go with a big
question<


question first okay I with a big
 


question first okay I with a big
question<


question first yeah I think it's very
 


question first yeah I think it's very
interesting<


interesting hypothesis or idea and I
 


interesting hypothesis or idea and I
have<


have a background in physics so I know a
 


have a background in physics so I know a
little<


little bit about physical theories the
 


little bit about physical theories the
standard<


standard model of particle physics and
 


standard model of particle physics and
general<


general relativity theory and they are
 


general relativity theory and they are
amazing<


amazing and describe virtually
 


amazing and describe virtually
everything<


everything in the universe and they're
 


everything in the universe and they're
all<


all in a sense computable theories I
 


all in a sense computable theories I
mean<


mean they're very hard to compute and
 


mean they're very hard to compute and
you<


you know it's very elegant simple
 


you know it's very elegant simple
theories<


theories which describe virtually
 


theories which describe virtually
everything<


everything in the universe so there's a
 


everything in the universe so there's a
strong<


strong indication that somehow the
 


strong indication that somehow the
universe<


universe is computable but it's a
 


universe is computable but it's a
plausible<


plausible hypothesis so what what do you
 


plausible hypothesis so what what do you
think<


think just like you said general
 


think just like you said general
relativity<


relativity quantum field theory what do
 


relativity quantum field theory what do
you<


you think that the laws of physics are
 


you think that the laws of physics are
so<


so nice and beautiful and simple and
 


so nice and beautiful and simple and
compressible<


compressible do you think our universe
 


compressible do you think our universe
was<


was designed is naturally this way are
 


was designed is naturally this way are
we<


we just focusing on the parts that are
 


we just focusing on the parts that are
especially<


especially compressible our human minds
 


especially compressible our human minds
just<


just enjoy something about that
 


just enjoy something about that
simplicity<


simplicity and in fact there's other
 


simplicity and in fact there's other
things<


things that are not so compressible no I
 


things that are not so compressible no I
strongly<


strongly believe and I'm pretty
 


strongly believe and I'm pretty
convinced<


convinced that the universe is
 


convinced that the universe is
inherently<


inherently beautiful elegant and simple
 


inherently beautiful elegant and simple
and<


and described by these equations and
 


and described by these equations and
we're<


we're not just picking that I mean if
 


we're not just picking that I mean if
the<


the versatile phenomena which cannot be
 


the versatile phenomena which cannot be
need<


need to describe scientists would try
 


need to describe scientists would try
that<


that right and you know there's biology
 


that right and you know there's biology
which<


which is more messy but we understand
 


which is more messy but we understand
that<


that it's an emergent phenomena and you
 


that it's an emergent phenomena and you
know<


know it's complex systems but they still
 


know it's complex systems but they still
follow<


follow the same rules right of quantum
 


follow the same rules right of quantum
electrodynamics<


electrodynamics and all of chemistry
 


electrodynamics and all of chemistry
follows<


follows that and we know that I mean we
 


follows that and we know that I mean we
cannot<


cannot compute everything because we
 


cannot compute everything because we
have<


have limited computational resources now
 


have limited computational resources now
I<


I think it's not a bias of the humans
 


I think it's not a bias of the humans
but<


but it's objectively simple I mean of
 


but it's objectively simple I mean of
course<


course you never know you know maybe
 


course you never know you know maybe
there's<


there's some corners very far out in the
 


there's some corners very far out in the
universe<


universe or super super tiny below the
 


universe or super super tiny below the
nucleus<


nucleus of atoms or well parallel
 


nucleus of atoms or well parallel
universes<


universes where which are not nice and
 


universes where which are not nice and
simple<


simple but there's no evidence for that
 


simple but there's no evidence for that
and<


and you should apply Occam's razor and
 


and you should apply Occam's razor and
you<


you know just the simple story
 


you know just the simple story
consistent<


consistent with but also it's a little
 


consistent with but also it's a little
bit


bit
 


bit
for<


for friendship so maybe a quick pause
 


for friendship so maybe a quick pause
what<


what is Occam's razor so or comes razor
 


what is Occam's razor so or comes razor
says<


says that you should not multiply
 


says that you should not multiply
entities<


entities beyond necessity which sort of
 


entities beyond necessity which sort of
if<


if you translate it to proper English
 


if you translate it to proper English
means<


means and and you know in a scientific
 


means and and you know in a scientific
context<


context means that if you have two
 


context means that if you have two
series<


series or hypotheses or models which
 


series or hypotheses or models which
equally<


equally well describe the phenomenon
 


equally well describe the phenomenon
your<


your study or the data you should choose
 


your study or the data you should choose
the<


the more simple one so that's just the
 


the more simple one so that's just the
principle<


principle you're sort of that's not like
 


principle you're sort of that's not like
a<


a provable law perhaps perhaps we'll
 


a provable law perhaps perhaps we'll
kind<


kind of discuss it and think about it
 


kind of discuss it and think about it
but<


but what's the intuition of why the
 


but what's the intuition of why the
simpler<


simpler answer is the one that is likely
 


simpler answer is the one that is likely
to<


to be more correct descriptor of
 


to be more correct descriptor of
whatever<


whatever we're talking about
 


whatever we're talking about
I<


I believe that Occam's razor is probably
 


I believe that Occam's razor is probably
the<


the most important principle in science
 


the most important principle in science
I<


I mean of course we logically Duck
 


I mean of course we logically Duck
shouldn't<


shouldn't be do experimental design but
 


shouldn't be do experimental design but
science<


science is about finding understanding
 


science is about finding understanding
the<


the world finding models of the world
 


the world finding models of the world
and<


and we can come up with crazy complex
 


and we can come up with crazy complex
models<


models which you know explain everything
 


models which you know explain everything
but<


but predict nothing but the simple model
 


but predict nothing but the simple model
seem<


seem to have predictive power and it's a
 


seem to have predictive power and it's a
valid<


valid question why yeah and the two
 


valid question why yeah and the two
answers<


answers to that you can just accept it
 


answers to that you can just accept it
that<


that is the principle of science and we
 


that is the principle of science and we
use<


use this principle and it seems to be
 


use this principle and it seems to be
successful<


successful we don't know why but it just
 


successful we don't know why but it just
happens<


happens to be or you can try you know
 


happens to be or you can try you know
find<


find another principle which explains or
 


find another principle which explains or
comes<


comes razor and if we start with the
 


comes razor and if we start with the
assumption<


assumption that the world is governed by
 


assumption that the world is governed by
simple<


simple rules then there's a bias toward
 


simple rules then there's a bias toward
simplicity<


simplicity and pliant Occam's razor is
 


simplicity and pliant Occam's razor is
the<


the mechanism to finding these rules and
 


the mechanism to finding these rules and
actually<


actually in a more quantitative sense
 


actually in a more quantitative sense
and<


and we come back to that later in terms
 


and we come back to that later in terms
of<


of some Roman attraction you can
 


of some Roman attraction you can
rigorously<


rigorously prove that usually assume
 


rigorously prove that usually assume
that<


that the world is simple then Occam's
 


that the world is simple then Occam's
razor<


razor is the best you can do in a
 


razor is the best you can do in a
certain<


certain sense so I apologize for the
 


certain sense so I apologize for the
romanticized<


romanticized question but why do you
 


romanticized question but why do you
think<


think outside of its effectiveness why
 


think outside of its effectiveness why
do<


do we do you think we find simplicity so
 


do we do you think we find simplicity so
appealing<


appealing as human beings well
 


appealing as human beings well
just<


just why does e equals mc-squared seems
 


just why does e equals mc-squared seems
so<


so beautiful to us humans I guess mostly
 


so beautiful to us humans I guess mostly
in<


in general many things can be explained
 


in general many things can be explained
by<


by an evolutionary argument and you know
 


by an evolutionary argument and you know
there's<


there's some artifacts and humans which
 


there's some artifacts and humans which
you<


you know are just artifacts and not an
 


you know are just artifacts and not an
evolutionary<


evolutionary necessary but there's this
 


evolutionary necessary but there's this
beauty<


beauty and simplicity it's I believe at
 


beauty and simplicity it's I believe at
least<


least the core is about like science
 


least the core is about like science
finding<


finding regularities in the world
 


finding regularities in the world
understanding<


understanding the world which is
 


understanding the world which is
necessary<


necessary for survival right you know if
 


necessary for survival right you know if
I<


I look at a bush right and I just seen
 


I look at a bush right and I just seen
Norris<


Norris and there is a tiger right and
 


Norris and there is a tiger right and
eats<


eats me then I'm dead but if I try to
 


eats me then I'm dead but if I try to
find<


find a pattern and we know that humans
 


find a pattern and we know that humans
are<


are prone to find more patterns in data
 


are prone to find more patterns in data
than<


than they are you know like the you know
 


than they are you know like the you know
Mars<


Mars face and all these things but these
 


Mars face and all these things but these
buyers<


buyers towards finding patterns even if
 


buyers towards finding patterns even if
they<


they are not but I mean its best of
 


they are not but I mean its best of
course<


course if they are yeah helps us for
 


course if they are yeah helps us for
survival<


survival yeah that's fascinating I
 


survival yeah that's fascinating I
haven't<


haven't thought really about this I
 


haven't thought really about this I
thought<


thought I just loved science but they're
 


thought I just loved science but they're
indeed<


indeed from in terms of just for
 


indeed from in terms of just for
survival<


survival purposes there is an
 


survival purposes there is an
evolutionary<


evolutionary argument for why why we
 


evolutionary argument for why why we
find<


find the work of Einstein is so
 


find the work of Einstein is so
beautiful<


beautiful maybe a quick small tangent
 


beautiful maybe a quick small tangent
could<


could you describe what's Solomonov
 


could you describe what's Solomonov
induction<


induction is yeah so that's a theory
 


induction is yeah so that's a theory
which<


which I claim and Riesling enough sort
 


which I claim and Riesling enough sort
of<


of claimed you know a long time ago that
 


of claimed you know a long time ago that
this<


this solves the big philosophical
 


this solves the big philosophical
problem<


problem of induction and I believe the
 


problem of induction and I believe the
claim<


claim is essentially true and what it
 


claim is essentially true and what it
does<


does is the following so okay for the
 


does is the following so okay for the
picky<


picky listener induction can be
 


picky listener induction can be
interpreted<


interpreted narrowly and wildly narrow
 


interpreted narrowly and wildly narrow
means<


means inferring models from data and
 


means inferring models from data and
widely<


widely means also then using these
 


widely means also then using these
models<


models for doing predictions or
 


models for doing predictions or
predictions<


predictions also part of of the
 


predictions also part of of the
induction<


induction so I'm little sloppy sort of
 


induction so I'm little sloppy sort of
as<


as a terminology and maybe that comes
 


as a terminology and maybe that comes
from<


from ray solomonoff you know being
 


from ray solomonoff you know being
sloppy<


sloppy maybe
 


sloppy maybe
saying<


saying it we can't complain anymore
 


saying it we can't complain anymore
so<


so let me explain a little bit this
 


so let me explain a little bit this
theory<


theory yeah in simple terms so assume we
 


theory yeah in simple terms so assume we
have<


have a data sequence make it very simple
 


have a data sequence make it very simple
the<


the simplest one say 1 1 1 1 1 and you
 


the simplest one say 1 1 1 1 1 and you
see<


see if 100 ones yeah what do you think
 


see if 100 ones yeah what do you think
comes<


comes next the natural order I repeat up
 


comes next the natural order I repeat up
a<


a little bit the natural answer is of
 


a little bit the natural answer is of
course<


course you know 1 ok and questions why
 


course you know 1 ok and questions why
ok<


ok well we see a pattern there yeah ok
 


ok well we see a pattern there yeah ok
there's<


there's a 1 and we repeat it and why
 


there's a 1 and we repeat it and why
should<


should it suddenly after a hundred ones
 


should it suddenly after a hundred ones
be<


be different so what we're looking for
 


be different so what we're looking for
is<


is simple explanations or models for the
 


is simple explanations or models for the
data<


data we have and now the question is a
 


data we have and now the question is a
model<


model has to be presented in a certain
 


model has to be presented in a certain
language<


language in which language to be used in
 


language in which language to be used in
science<


science we want formal languages and we
 


science we want formal languages and we
can<


can use mathematics or we can use
 


can use mathematics or we can use
programs<


programs on a computer so abstract me on
 


programs on a computer so abstract me on
a<


a Turing machine for instance or can be
 


a Turing machine for instance or can be
a<


a general-purpose computer so and they
 


a general-purpose computer so and they
of<


of course lots of models of you can say
 


of course lots of models of you can say
maybe<


maybe it's a hundred ones and then 100
 


maybe it's a hundred ones and then 100
zeros<


zeros and a hundred ones that's a model
 


zeros and a hundred ones that's a model
right<


right but there are simpler models
 


right but there are simpler models
there's<


there's a model print one loop and it
 


there's a model print one loop and it
also<


also explains the data and if you push
 


also explains the data and if you push
the<


the to the extreme you are looking for
 


the to the extreme you are looking for
the<


the shortest program which if you run
 


the shortest program which if you run
this<


this program reproduces the data you
 


this program reproduces the data you
have<


have it will not stop it will continue
 


have it will not stop it will continue
naturally<


naturally and this you take for your
 


naturally and this you take for your
prediction<


prediction and on the sequence of ones
 


prediction and on the sequence of ones
it's<


it's very plausible right at the print
 


it's very plausible right at the print
one<


one loop it's the shortest program we
 


one loop it's the shortest program we
can<


can give some more complex examples like
 


can give some more complex examples like
1<


1 2 3 4 5 what comes next the short
 


1 2 3 4 5 what comes next the short
program<


program is again you know counter and so
 


program is again you know counter and so
that<


that is roughly speaking house a lot of
 


that is roughly speaking house a lot of
interaction<


interaction works the extra twist is
 


interaction works the extra twist is
that<


that it can also deal with noisy data so
 


that it can also deal with noisy data so
if<


if you have for instance a coin flip say
 


if you have for instance a coin flip say
a<


a biased coin which comes up head with
 


a biased coin which comes up head with
60%<


60% probability then it will predict if
 


60% probability then it will predict if
you<


you learn and figure this out and after
 


you learn and figure this out and after
a<


a while it predict or the next coin flip
 


a while it predict or the next coin flip
will<


will be head with probability 60% so
 


will be head with probability 60% so
it's<


it's the stochastic version of that but
 


it's the stochastic version of that but
the<


the goal is the dream is always the
 


the goal is the dream is always the
search<


search for the short program yes yeah
 


search for the short program yes yeah
well<


well in solomonov induction precisely
 


well in solomonov induction precisely
what<


what you do is so you combine so looking
 


what you do is so you combine so looking
for<


for the shortest program is like
 


for the shortest program is like
applying<


applying AAPIs race
 


applying AAPIs race
like<


like looking for the simplest theory
 


like looking for the simplest theory
there's<


there's also a pakoras principle which
 


there's also a pakoras principle which
says<


says if you have multiple hypotheses
 


says if you have multiple hypotheses
which<


which equally well describe you data
 


which equally well describe you data
don't<


don't discard any of them keep all of
 


don't discard any of them keep all of
them<


them around you never know and you can
 


them around you never know and you can
put<


put it together and say ok have a
 


put it together and say ok have a
buyer's<


buyer's to her simplicity but I don't
 


buyer's to her simplicity but I don't
rule<


rule out the larger models and
 


rule out the larger models and
technically<


technically what we do is we weigh the
 


technically what we do is we weigh the
shorter<


shorter models higher and the longer
 


shorter models higher and the longer
models<


models lower and you use a Bayesian
 


models lower and you use a Bayesian
techniques<


techniques you have a prior and which is
 


techniques you have a prior and which is
precisely<


precisely 2 to the minus the complexity
 


precisely 2 to the minus the complexity
of<


of the program and you weigh all this
 


of the program and you weigh all this
hypotheses<


hypotheses and take this mixture and
 


hypotheses and take this mixture and
then<


then you get also this plasticity in
 


then you get also this plasticity in
yeah<


yeah like many of your ideas that's just
 


yeah like many of your ideas that's just
a<


a beautiful idea of weighing based on
 


a beautiful idea of weighing based on
the<


the simplicity of the program I love
 


the simplicity of the program I love
that<


that that that seems to me may be a very
 


that that that seems to me may be a very
human<


human central concept seems to be a very
 


human central concept seems to be a very
appealing<


appealing way of discovering good
 


appealing way of discovering good
programs<


programs in this world you've used the
 


programs in this world you've used the
term<


term compression quite a bit I think
 


term compression quite a bit I think
it's<


it's a beautiful idea sort of we just
 


it's a beautiful idea sort of we just
talked<


talked about simplicity and maybe
 


talked about simplicity and maybe
science<


science or just all of our intellectual
 


science or just all of our intellectual
pursuits<


pursuits is basically the attempt to
 


pursuits is basically the attempt to
compress<


compress the complexity all around us
 


compress the complexity all around us
into<


into something simple so what does this
 


into something simple so what does this
word<


word mean to you
 


word mean to you
compression<


compression I essentially have already
 


compression I essentially have already
explained<


explained it so it compression means for
 


explained it so it compression means for
me<


me finding short programs for the data
 


me finding short programs for the data
or<


or the phenomena at hand you could
 


or the phenomena at hand you could
interpret<


interpret it more widely as you know
 


interpret it more widely as you know
finding<


finding simple theories which can be
 


finding simple theories which can be
mathematical<


mathematical theory so maybe even
 


mathematical theory so maybe even
informal<


informal you know like you know just
 


informal you know like you know just
inverts<


inverts compression means finding short
 


inverts compression means finding short
descriptions<


descriptions explanations programs
 


descriptions explanations programs
little<


little data do you see science as a kind
 


little data do you see science as a kind
of<


of our human attempt at compression so
 


of our human attempt at compression so
we're<


we're speaking more generally because
 


we're speaking more generally because
when<


when you say programs kind of zooming in
 


when you say programs kind of zooming in
a<


a particular sort of almost like
 


a particular sort of almost like
computer<


computer science artificial intelligence
 


computer science artificial intelligence
focus<


focus but do you see all of human
 


focus but do you see all of human
endeavor<


endeavor as a kind of compression well
 


endeavor as a kind of compression well
at<


at least all of science ICSI and evolve
 


at least all of science ICSI and evolve
compression<


compression at all of humanity maybe and
 


compression at all of humanity maybe and
well<


well they are so
 


well they are so
other<


other aspects of science like
 


other aspects of science like
experimental<


experimental design right I mean we we
 


experimental design right I mean we we
create<


create experiments specifically to get
 


create experiments specifically to get
extra<


extra knowledge and this is that isn't
 


extra knowledge and this is that isn't
part<


part of the decision-making process but
 


part of the decision-making process but
once<


once we have the data to understand the
 


once we have the data to understand the
data<


data is essentially compression so I
 


data is essentially compression so I
don't<


don't see any difference between
 


don't see any difference between
contrast<


contrast compression understanding and
 


contrast compression understanding and
prediction<


prediction so we're jumping around
 


prediction so we're jumping around
topics<


topics a little bit but returning back
 


topics a little bit but returning back
the<


the simplicity a fascinating concept of
 


the simplicity a fascinating concept of
komagawa<


komagawa of complexity so in your sense
 


komagawa of complexity so in your sense
the<


the most objects in our mathematical
 


the most objects in our mathematical
universe<


universe have high komagawa of
 


universe have high komagawa of
complexity<


complexity and maybe what is first of
 


complexity and maybe what is first of
all<


all what is coma graph complexity ok
 


all what is coma graph complexity ok
Kolmogorov<


Kolmogorov complexity is a notion of
 


Kolmogorov complexity is a notion of
simplicity<


simplicity or complexity and it takes
 


simplicity or complexity and it takes
the<


the compression view to the extreme so I
 


the compression view to the extreme so I
explained<


explained before that if you have some
 


explained before that if you have some
data<


data sequence just think about a file on
 


data sequence just think about a file on
a<


a computer and best sort of you know
 


a computer and best sort of you know
just<


just a string of bits and if you and we
 


just a string of bits and if you and we
have<


have data compresses likely compress big
 


have data compresses likely compress big
files<


files in terms a sip files with certain
 


files in terms a sip files with certain
compressors<


compressors and you can also put
 


compressors and you can also put
yourself<


yourself extracting archives that means
 


yourself extracting archives that means
as<


as an executable if you run it it
 


as an executable if you run it it
reproduces<


reproduces the original file without
 


reproduces the original file without
needing<


needing an extra decompressor it's just
 


needing an extra decompressor it's just
a<


a decompressor plus the archive together
 


a decompressor plus the archive together
in<


in one and now there are better and
 


in one and now there are better and
worse<


worse compressors and you can ask what
 


worse compressors and you can ask what
is<


is the ultimate compressor so what is
 


is the ultimate compressor so what is
the<


the shortest possible self-extracting
 


the shortest possible self-extracting
archives<


archives you could produce for a certain
 


archives you could produce for a certain
data<


data set yeah which reproduces the data
 


data set yeah which reproduces the data
set<


set and the length of this is called the
 


set and the length of this is called the
Kolmogorov<


Kolmogorov complexity and arguably that
 


Kolmogorov complexity and arguably that
is<


is the information content in the data
 


is the information content in the data
set<


set I mean if the data set is very
 


set I mean if the data set is very
redundant<


redundant or very boring you can
 


redundant or very boring you can
compress<


compress it very well so the information
 


compress it very well so the information
content<


content should be low and you know it is
 


content should be low and you know it is
low<


low according to this difference this is
 


low according to this difference this is
the<


the length of the shortest program that
 


the length of the shortest program that
summarizes<


summarizes the data yes yeah and what's
 


summarizes the data yes yeah and what's
your<


your sense of our sort of universe when
 


your sense of our sort of universe when
we<


we think about the different the
 


we think about the different the
different<


different objects in our universe that
 


different objects in our universe that
we<


we each are concepts or whatever the
 


we each are concepts or whatever the
at<


at every level do they have higher or
 


at every level do they have higher or
local<


local girl complexity so what's the hope
 


local girl complexity so what's the hope
do<


do we have a lot of hope and be able to
 


do we have a lot of hope and be able to
summarize<


summarize much of our world that's a
 


summarize much of our world that's a
tricky<


tricky and difficult question so as I
 


tricky and difficult question so as I
said<


said before I believe that the whole
 


said before I believe that the whole
universe<


universe based on the evidence we have
 


universe based on the evidence we have
is<


is very simple so it has a very short
 


is very simple so it has a very short
description<


description the whole sorry did you
 


description the whole sorry did you
would<


would you linger on that the whole
 


would you linger on that the whole
universe<


universe what does I mean do you mean at
 


universe what does I mean do you mean at
the<


the very basic fundamental level in
 


the very basic fundamental level in
order<


order to create the universe yes yeah so
 


order to create the universe yes yeah so
you<


you need a very short program when you
 


you need a very short program when you
run<


run it to get the thing going you get
 


run it to get the thing going you get
the<


the thing going and then it will
 


the thing going and then it will
reproduce<


reproduce our universe and there's a
 


reproduce our universe and there's a
problem<


problem with noise we can come back to
 


problem with noise we can come back to
the<


the later possibly noise a problem or a
 


the later possibly noise a problem or a
fear<


fear is it a bug or a feature I would
 


fear is it a bug or a feature I would
say<


say it makes our life as a scientist
 


say it makes our life as a scientist
really<


really really much harder I didn't think
 


really really much harder I didn't think
about<


about without noise we wouldn't need all
 


about without noise we wouldn't need all
of<


of the statistics but that maybe we
 


of the statistics but that maybe we
wouldn't<


wouldn't feel like there's a free will
 


wouldn't feel like there's a free will
maybe<


maybe we need that for the ethics this
 


maybe we need that for the ethics this
is<


is an illusion that Norris can give you
 


is an illusion that Norris can give you
freezing<


freezing that way it's a feature but
 


freezing that way it's a feature but
also<


also if you don't have noise you have
 


also if you don't have noise you have
chaotic<


chaotic phenomena which are effectively
 


chaotic phenomena which are effectively
like<


like noise so we can't you know get away
 


like noise so we can't you know get away
with<


with statistics even then I mean think
 


with statistics even then I mean think
about<


about rolling a dice and you know forget
 


about rolling a dice and you know forget
about<


about quantum mechanics and you know
 


about quantum mechanics and you know
exactly<


exactly how you you throw it but I mean
 


exactly how you you throw it but I mean
it's<


it's still so hard to compute a
 


it's still so hard to compute a
trajectory<


trajectory that effectively it is best
 


trajectory that effectively it is best
to<


to model it you know as you know coming
 


to model it you know as you know coming
out<


out this a number this probability 1
 


out this a number this probability 1
over<


over 6 but from from this set of
 


over 6 but from from this set of
philosophical<


philosophical como go of complexity
 


philosophical como go of complexity
perspective<


perspective if we didn't have noise then
 


perspective if we didn't have noise then
arguably<


arguably you could describe the whole
 


arguably you could describe the whole
universe<


universe as well as standard model plus
 


universe as well as standard model plus
general<


general relativity I mean we don't have
 


general relativity I mean we don't have
a<


a theory of everything yet but sort of
 


a theory of everything yet but sort of
assuming<


assuming we are close to it or have it
 


assuming we are close to it or have it
here<


here plus the initial conditions which
 


here plus the initial conditions which
may<


may hopefully be simple and then you
 


may hopefully be simple and then you
just<


just run it and then you would reproduce
 


just run it and then you would reproduce
the<


the universe but that's all by noise or
 


the universe but that's all by noise or
by<


by chaotic systems or by initial
 


by chaotic systems or by initial
conditions<


conditions which you know may be complex
 


conditions which you know may be complex
so<


so now if we don't
 


so now if we don't
the<


the whole universe but just a subset you
 


the whole universe but just a subset you
know<


know just take planet Earth planet Earth
 


know just take planet Earth planet Earth
cannot<


cannot be compressed you know into a
 


cannot be compressed you know into a
couple<


couple of equations this is a hugely
 


couple of equations this is a hugely
complex<


complex just so interesting so when you
 


complex just so interesting so when you
look<


look at the window like the whole thing
 


look at the window like the whole thing
might<


might be simple when you just take a
 


might be simple when you just take a
small<


small window then it may become complex
 


small window then it may become complex
and<


and that may be counterintuitive but
 


and that may be counterintuitive but
there's<


there's a very nice analogy the the book
 


there's a very nice analogy the the book
the<


the library of all books so imagine you
 


the library of all books so imagine you
have<


have a normal library with interesting
 


have a normal library with interesting
books<


books and you go there great lots of
 


books and you go there great lots of
information<


information and you quite complex yeah
 


information and you quite complex yeah
so<


so now I create a library which contains
 


so now I create a library which contains
all<


all possible books say of 500 pages so
 


all possible books say of 500 pages so
the<


the first book just has a aaaa over all
 


the first book just has a aaaa over all
the<


the pages the next book aaaa and ends
 


the pages the next book aaaa and ends
with<


with P and so on I create this library
 


with P and so on I create this library
of<


of all books I can write a super short
 


of all books I can write a super short
program<


program which creates this library so
 


program which creates this library so
this<


this library which has all books has
 


this library which has all books has
zero<


zero information content and you take a
 


zero information content and you take a
subset<


subset of this library and suddenly have
 


subset of this library and suddenly have
a<


a lot of information in there so that's
 


a lot of information in there so that's
fascinating<


fascinating I think one of the most
 


fascinating I think one of the most
beautiful<


beautiful object mathematical objects
 


beautiful object mathematical objects
that<


that at least today seems to be under
 


that at least today seems to be under
study<


study or under talked about is cellular
 


study or under talked about is cellular
automata<


automata what lessons do you draw from
 


automata what lessons do you draw from
sort<


sort of the game of life for cellular
 


sort of the game of life for cellular
automata<


automata where you start with the simple
 


automata where you start with the simple
rules<


rules just like you're describing with
 


rules just like you're describing with
the<


the universe and somehow complexity
 


the universe and somehow complexity
emerges<


emerges do you feel like you have an
 


emerges do you feel like you have an
intuitive<


intuitive grasp on the behavior the
 


intuitive grasp on the behavior the
fascinating<


fascinating behavior of such systems
 


fascinating behavior of such systems
where<


where some like you said some chaotic
 


where some like you said some chaotic
behavior<


behavior it could happen some complexity
 


behavior it could happen some complexity
could<


could emerge some it could die out and
 


could emerge some it could die out and
some<


some very rigid structures you have a
 


some very rigid structures you have a
sense<


sense about cellular automata that
 


sense about cellular automata that
somehow<


somehow transfers maybe to the bigger
 


somehow transfers maybe to the bigger
questions<


questions of our universe is a cellular
 


questions of our universe is a cellular
automata<


automata and especially the Conway's
 


automata and especially the Conway's
Game<


Game of Life is really great because
 


Game of Life is really great because
this<


this rule are so simple you can explain
 


this rule are so simple you can explain
it<


it to every child and mean by hand you
 


it to every child and mean by hand you
can<


can simulate a little bit and you see
 


can simulate a little bit and you see
these<


these beautiful patterns emerge and
 


these beautiful patterns emerge and
people<


people have proven you know that is even
 


people have proven you know that is even
Turing<


Turing complete you cannot just use a
 


Turing complete you cannot just use a
computer<


computer to simulate game of life but
 


computer to simulate game of life but
you<


you can also use game of life to
 


you can also use game of life to
simulate<


simulate any computer that is truly
 


simulate any computer that is truly
amazing


amazing
 


amazing
and<


and it's it's the prime example probably
 


and it's it's the prime example probably
to<


to demonstrate that very
 


to demonstrate that very
simple<


simple rules can lead to very rich
 


simple rules can lead to very rich
phenomena<


phenomena and people you know sometimes
 


phenomena and people you know sometimes
you<


you know how can how is chemistry and
 


you know how can how is chemistry and
biology<


biology is so rich I mean this can't be
 


biology is so rich I mean this can't be
based<


based on simple rules yeah but now we
 


based on simple rules yeah but now we
know<


know quantum electrodynamics describes
 


know quantum electrodynamics describes
all<


all of chemistry and and become later
 


all of chemistry and and become later
back<


back to that I claim intelligence can be
 


back to that I claim intelligence can be
explained<


explained or described in one single
 


explained or described in one single
equation<


equation this very rich phenomenon you
 


equation this very rich phenomenon you
asked<


asked also about whether you know I
 


asked also about whether you know I
understand<


understand this phenomenon and it's
 


understand this phenomenon and it's
probably<


probably not and this is saying you
 


probably not and this is saying you
never<


never understand really things you just
 


never understand really things you just
get<


get used to them and pretty using used
 


get used to them and pretty using used
to<


to sell all automata so you believe that
 


to sell all automata so you believe that
you<


you understand now why this phenomenon
 


you understand now why this phenomenon
happens<


happens but I give you a different
 


happens but I give you a different
example<


example I didn't play too much with this
 


example I didn't play too much with this
converse<


converse game of life but a little bit
 


converse game of life but a little bit
more<


more with fractals and with the
 


more with fractals and with the
Mandelbrot<


Mandelbrot set and it's beautiful you
 


Mandelbrot set and it's beautiful you
know<


know patterns just just look Mandelbrot
 


know patterns just just look Mandelbrot
set<


set and well when the computers were
 


set and well when the computers were
really<


really slow in our just a black and
 


really slow in our just a black and
white<


white monitor and programmed my own
 


white monitor and programmed my own
program<


program sana in assembler - Wow Wow to
 


program sana in assembler - Wow Wow to
get<


get these vectors on the screen and it
 


get these vectors on the screen and it
was<


was mesmerised and much later so I
 


was mesmerised and much later so I
returned<


returned to this you know every couple
 


returned to this you know every couple
of<


of years and then I try to understand
 


of years and then I try to understand
what<


what is going on and you can understand
 


what is going on and you can understand
a<


a little bit so I try to derive the
 


a little bit so I try to derive the
locations<


locations you know there are these
 


locations you know there are these
circles<


circles and the Apple shape and then you
 


circles and the Apple shape and then you
have<


have smaller Mandelbrot sets recursively
 


have smaller Mandelbrot sets recursively
in<


in this set in this way to
 


in this set in this way to
mathematically<


mathematically by solving high order
 


mathematically by solving high order
polynomials<


polynomials to figure out where these
 


polynomials to figure out where these
centers<


centers are and what size there are
 


centers are and what size there are
approximately<


approximately and by sort of ant
 


approximately and by sort of ant
mathematically<


mathematically approaching this problem
 


mathematically approaching this problem
you<


you slowly get a feeling of why things
 


you slowly get a feeling of why things
are<


are like they are and that sort of isn't
 


are like they are and that sort of isn't
you<


you know first step to understanding why
 


you know first step to understanding why
this<


this rich phenomena do you think as P as
 


this rich phenomena do you think as P as
possible<


possible what's your intuition you think
 


possible what's your intuition you think
it's<


it's possible to reverse engineer and
 


it's possible to reverse engineer and
find<


find the short program that generated
 


find the short program that generated
the<


the these fractals sort of by what
 


the these fractals sort of by what
looking


looking
 


looking
at<


at the fractals well in principle yes
 


at the fractals well in principle yes
yeah<


yeah so I mean in principle what you can
 


yeah so I mean in principle what you can
do<


do is you take you know any data set you
 


do is you take you know any data set you
know<


know you take these fractals or you take
 


know you take these fractals or you take
whatever<


whatever your data set whatever you have
 


whatever your data set whatever you have
say<


say a picture of conveys game of life
 


say a picture of conveys game of life
and<


and you run through all programs you
 


and you run through all programs you
take<


take your programs 1 2 3 4 and all these
 


take your programs 1 2 3 4 and all these
programs<


programs around them all in parallel in
 


programs around them all in parallel in
so<


so called dovetailing fashion give them
 


so called dovetailing fashion give them
computational<


computational resources first one 50%
 


computational resources first one 50%
second<


second 1/2 resources and so on and let
 


second 1/2 resources and so on and let
them<


them run wait until they halt give an
 


them run wait until they halt give an
output<


output compare it to your data and if
 


output compare it to your data and if
some<


some of these programs produced the
 


some of these programs produced the
correct<


correct data then you stop and then you
 


correct data then you stop and then you
have<


have already used some program it may be
 


have already used some program it may be
a<


a long program because it's faster and
 


a long program because it's faster and
then<


then you continue and you get shorter
 


then you continue and you get shorter
and<


and shorter programs until you
 


and shorter programs until you
eventually<


eventually find the shortest program the
 


eventually find the shortest program the
interesting<


interesting thing you can never know
 


interesting thing you can never know
whether<


whether to short this program because
 


whether to short this program because
there<


there could be an even shorter program
 


there could be an even shorter program
which<


which is just even slower and you just
 


which is just even slower and you just
have<


have to wait here but asymptotically and
 


have to wait here but asymptotically and
actually<


actually after finite time you have this
 


actually after finite time you have this
shortest<


shortest program so this is a
 


shortest program so this is a
theoretical<


theoretical but completely impractical
 


theoretical but completely impractical
way<


way of finding the underlying structure
 


way of finding the underlying structure
in<


in every data set and there was a lot of
 


in every data set and there was a lot of
interaction<


interaction dolls and Kolmogorov
 


interaction dolls and Kolmogorov
complexity<


complexity in practice of course we have
 


complexity in practice of course we have
to<


to approach the problem more
 


to approach the problem more
intelligently<


intelligently and then if you take
 


intelligently and then if you take
resource<


resource limitations into account
 


resource limitations into account
there's<


there's friends the field of
 


there's friends the field of
pseudo-random<


pseudo-random numbers yeah and these are
 


pseudo-random numbers yeah and these are
random<


random that must so these are
 


random that must so these are
deterministic<


deterministic sequences but no algorithm
 


deterministic sequences but no algorithm
which<


which is fast fast means runs in
 


which is fast fast means runs in
polynomial<


polynomial time can detect that it's
 


polynomial time can detect that it's
actually<


actually deterministic so we can produce
 


actually deterministic so we can produce
interesting<


interesting I mean random numbers maybe
 


interesting I mean random numbers maybe
not<


not that interesting but just an example
 


not that interesting but just an example
we<


we can produce complex looking data and
 


we can produce complex looking data and
we<


we can then prove that no fast algorithm
 


we can then prove that no fast algorithm
can<


can detect the underlying pattern which
 


can detect the underlying pattern which
is<


is unfortunately is it that's a big
 


is unfortunately is it that's a big
challenge<


challenge for our search for simple
 


challenge for our search for simple
programs<


programs in the space of artificial
 


programs in the space of artificial
intelligence<


intelligence perhaps yes it definitely
 


intelligence perhaps yes it definitely
is<


is quantitative intelligence and it's
 


is quantitative intelligence and it's
quite<


quite surprising that it's I can't say
 


quite surprising that it's I can't say
easy<


easy here I mean
 


easy here I mean
worked<


worked really hard to find his theories
 


worked really hard to find his theories
but<


but apparently it was possible for human
 


but apparently it was possible for human
minds<


minds to find these simple rules in the
 


minds to find these simple rules in the
universe<


universe it could have been different
 


universe it could have been different
right<


right it could have been different it's
 


right it could have been different it's
it's<


it's uh it's inspiring so let me ask
 


it's uh it's inspiring so let me ask
another<


another absurdly big question what is
 


another absurdly big question what is
intelligence<


intelligence in your view so I have of
 


intelligence in your view so I have of
course<


course a definition I wasn't sure what
 


course a definition I wasn't sure what
you're<


you're gonna say because you could have
 


you're gonna say because you could have
just<


just as easily said I have no clue which
 


just as easily said I have no clue which
many<


many people would say I'm not modest in
 


many people would say I'm not modest in
this<


this question so the the informal
 


this question so the the informal
version<


version which ever got together be shame
 


version which ever got together be shame
like<


like who co-founded in mind is that
 


like who co-founded in mind is that
intelligence<


intelligence measures an agent's ability
 


intelligence measures an agent's ability
to<


to perform well in a wide range of
 


to perform well in a wide range of
environments<


environments so that doesn't sound very
 


environments so that doesn't sound very
impressive<


impressive and but it these words have
 


impressive and but it these words have
been<


been very carefully chosen and there is
 


been very carefully chosen and there is
a<


a mathematical theory behind it and we
 


a mathematical theory behind it and we
come<


come back to that later and if you look
 


come back to that later and if you look
at<


at this this definition right itself it
 


at this this definition right itself it
seems<


seems like yeah okay but it seems a lot
 


seems like yeah okay but it seems a lot
of<


of things are missing but if you think
 


of things are missing but if you think
it<


it through then you realize that most
 


it through then you realize that most
and<


and I claim all of the other traits at
 


and I claim all of the other traits at
least<


least of rational intelligence which we
 


least of rational intelligence which we
usually<


usually associate intelligence are
 


usually associate intelligence are
emergent<


emergent phenomena from this definition
 


emergent phenomena from this definition
in<


in creativity memorization planning
 


in creativity memorization planning
knowledge<


knowledge you all need that in order to
 


knowledge you all need that in order to
perform<


perform well in a wide range of
 


perform well in a wide range of
environments<


environments so you don't have to
 


environments so you don't have to
explicitly<


explicitly mention that in a definition
 


explicitly mention that in a definition
interesting<


interesting so yeah so the consciousness
 


interesting so yeah so the consciousness
abstract<


abstract reasoning or all these kinds of
 


abstract reasoning or all these kinds of
things<


things are just emerging phenomena that
 


things are just emerging phenomena that
help<


help you in towards can you say the
 


help you in towards can you say the
definition<


definition against multiple environments
 


definition against multiple environments
did<


did you mention or goals no but we have
 


did you mention or goals no but we have
an<


an alternative definition instead of
 


an alternative definition instead of
performing<


performing value conscious replace it by
 


performing value conscious replace it by
goals<


goals so intelligence measures an agent
 


goals so intelligence measures an agent
ability<


ability to achieve goals in a wide range
 


ability to achieve goals in a wide range
of<


of environments that's more or less
 


of environments that's more or less
because<


because in there there's an injection of
 


because in there there's an injection of
the<


the word goals so you
 


the word goals so you
to<


to specify their there should be a goal
 


to specify their there should be a goal
yeah<


yeah but perform well is sort of what is
 


yeah but perform well is sort of what is
it<


it does it mean it's the same problem
 


it does it mean it's the same problem
yeah<


yeah there's a little gray area but it's
 


yeah there's a little gray area but it's
much<


much closer to something that could be
 


much closer to something that could be
formalized<


formalized re in your view are humans
 


formalized re in your view are humans
where<


where do humans fit into that definition
 


where do humans fit into that definition
are<


are they general intelligence systems
 


are they general intelligence systems
that<


that are able to perform in like how
 


that are able to perform in like how
good<


good are they at fulfilling that
 


good are they at fulfilling that
definition<


definition at performing well in
 


definition at performing well in
multiple<


multiple environments yeah that's a big
 


multiple environments yeah that's a big
question<


question I mean the humans are
 


question I mean the humans are
performing<


performing best among all species as we
 


performing best among all species as we
know<


know we know of yeah depends you could
 


know we know of yeah depends you could
say<


say that trees and plants are doing
 


say that trees and plants are doing
better<


better job they'll probably outlast us
 


better job they'll probably outlast us
so<


so yeah but they're in a much more
 


so yeah but they're in a much more
narrow<


narrow environment right I mean you just
 


narrow environment right I mean you just
you<


you know I have a little bit of air
 


you know I have a little bit of air
pollutions<


pollutions and these trees die and we
 


pollutions and these trees die and we
can<


can adapt right we build houses with
 


can adapt right we build houses with
filters<


filters we we we do geoengineering so
 


filters we we we do geoengineering so
multiple<


multiple environment part yes that is
 


multiple environment part yes that is
very<


very important yes
 


very important yes
so<


so that distinguish narrow intelligence
 


so that distinguish narrow intelligence
from<


from wide intelligence also in the AI
 


from wide intelligence also in the AI
research<


research so let me ask the the Alan
 


research so let me ask the the Alan
Turing<


Turing question can machines think can
 


Turing question can machines think can
machines<


machines be intelligent so in your view
 


machines be intelligent so in your view
I<


I have to kind of ask the answer is
 


I have to kind of ask the answer is
probably<


probably yes but I want to kind of here
 


probably yes but I want to kind of here
with<


with your thoughts on it can machines be
 


with your thoughts on it can machines be
made<


made to fulfill this definition of
 


made to fulfill this definition of
intelligence<


intelligence to achieve intelligence
 


intelligence to achieve intelligence
well<


well we are sort of getting there and
 


well we are sort of getting there and
you<


you know on a small scale we are already
 


you know on a small scale we are already
there<


there the wide range of environments is
 


there the wide range of environments is
missing<


missing about yourself driving cars we
 


missing about yourself driving cars we
have<


have programs which play go and chess we
 


have programs which play go and chess we
have<


have speech recognition so it's pretty
 


have speech recognition so it's pretty
amazing<


amazing but you can you know these are
 


amazing but you can you know these are
narrow<


narrow environments but if you look at
 


narrow environments but if you look at
alpha<


alpha zero that was also developed by
 


alpha zero that was also developed by
deep<


deep mind I mean what famous alphago and
 


deep mind I mean what famous alphago and
then<


then came alpha zero a year later there
 


then came alpha zero a year later there
was<


was truly amazing
 


was truly amazing
so<


so on reform a learning algorithm which
 


so on reform a learning algorithm which
is<


is able just by self play to play chess
 


is able just by self play to play chess
and<


and then also go and I mean yes they're
 


and then also go and I mean yes they're
both<


both games but they're quite different
 


both games but they're quite different
games<


games and you know this you didn't don't
 


games and you know this you didn't don't
feed<


feed them the rules of the game and the
 


feed them the rules of the game and the
most<


most remarkable thing which is still a
 


most remarkable thing which is still a
mystery<


mystery to me that usually for any
 


mystery to me that usually for any
decent<


decent chess program I don't know much
 


decent chess program I don't know much
about<


about go you need opening books and
 


about go you need opening books and
endgame<


endgame tables and so on - and nothing
 


endgame tables and so on - and nothing
in<


in there nothing was put in there it was
 


in there nothing was put in there it was
alpha<


alpha zero there's the self play
 


alpha zero there's the self play
mechanism<


mechanism starting from scratch being
 


mechanism starting from scratch being
able<


able to learn actually new strategies is
 


able to learn actually new strategies is
uh<


uh yeah it did rediscovered you know all
 


uh yeah it did rediscovered you know all
these<


these famous openings within four hours
 


these famous openings within four hours
by<


by himself
 


by himself
what<


what I was really happy about I'm a
 


what I was really happy about I'm a
terrible<


terrible chess player but I like queen
 


terrible chess player but I like queen
Gumby<


Gumby and alpha zero figured out that
 


Gumby and alpha zero figured out that
this<


this is the best opening correct so yes
 


this is the best opening correct so yes
that<


that you do to answer your question yes
 


that you do to answer your question yes
I<


I believe that general intelligence is
 


I believe that general intelligence is
possible<


possible and it also depends how you
 


possible and it also depends how you
define<


define it do you say AGI with general
 


define it do you say AGI with general
intelligence<


intelligence artificial general
 


intelligence artificial general
intelligence<


intelligence only refers to if you
 


intelligence only refers to if you
achieve<


achieve human-level or a subhuman level
 


achieve human-level or a subhuman level
but<


but quite broad is it also general
 


but quite broad is it also general
intelligence<


intelligence so we have to distinguish
 


intelligence so we have to distinguish
or<


or it's only super human intelligence
 


or it's only super human intelligence
general<


general artificial intelligence is there
 


general artificial intelligence is there
a<


a test in your mind like the Turing test
 


a test in your mind like the Turing test
for<


for natural language or some other test
 


for natural language or some other test
that<


that would impress the heck out of you
 


that would impress the heck out of you
that<


that would kind of cross the line of
 


that would kind of cross the line of
your<


your sense of intelligence within the
 


your sense of intelligence within the
framework<


framework that you said well the Turing
 


framework that you said well the Turing
test<


test well has been criticized a lot but
 


test well has been criticized a lot but
I<


I think it's not as bad as some people
 


I think it's not as bad as some people
thinking<


thinking some people think it's too
 


thinking some people think it's too
strong


strong
 


strong
so<


so it tests not just for a system to be
 


so it tests not just for a system to be
intelligent<


intelligent but it also has to fake
 


intelligent but it also has to fake
human<


human deception this section right which
 


human deception this section right which
is<


is you know much harder and on the other
 


is you know much harder and on the other
hand<


hand they say it's too weak yeah because
 


hand they say it's too weak yeah because
it<


it just may be fakes
 


it just may be fakes
you<


you know emotions or intelligent
 


you know emotions or intelligent
behavior<


behavior it's not real but I don't think
 


behavior it's not real but I don't think
that's<


that's the problem
 


that's the problem
or<


or big problem so if if you would pass
 


or big problem so if if you would pass
the<


the Turing test
 


the Turing test
so<


so conversation over terminal with a bot
 


so conversation over terminal with a bot
for<


for an hour or maybe a day or so and you
 


for an hour or maybe a day or so and you
can<


can fool a human into you know not
 


can fool a human into you know not
knowing<


knowing whether this is a human or not
 


knowing whether this is a human or not
that<


that it's
 


that it's
during<


during tests I would be truly impressed
 


during tests I would be truly impressed
and<


and we have this annual competitions
 


and we have this annual competitions
alumna<


alumna price and I mean it started with
 


alumna price and I mean it started with
Elijah<


Elijah that was the first conversational
 


Elijah that was the first conversational
program<


program and what is it called the
 


program and what is it called the
Japanese<


Japanese Mitsouko or so that's the
 


Japanese Mitsouko or so that's the
winner<


winner of the last you know a couple of
 


winner of the last you know a couple of
years<


years and well impressive yes quite
 


years and well impressive yes quite
impressive<


impressive and then google has developed
 


impressive and then google has developed
Meena<


Meena right just just recently that's an
 


Meena right just just recently that's an
open<


open domain conversational but just a
 


open domain conversational but just a
couple<


couple of weeks ago I think yeah I kind
 


couple of weeks ago I think yeah I kind
of<


of like the metric that sort of the
 


of like the metric that sort of the
Alexa<


Alexa price has proposed and he maybe
 


Alexa price has proposed and he maybe
it's<


it's obvious to you it wasn't to me of
 


it's obvious to you it wasn't to me of
setting<


setting sort of a length of a
 


setting sort of a length of a
conversation<


conversation like you want the bot to be
 


conversation like you want the bot to be
sufficiently<


sufficiently interestingly you'd want to
 


sufficiently interestingly you'd want to
keep<


keep talking to it for like 20 minutes
 


keep talking to it for like 20 minutes
and<


and that's a that's a surprisingly
 


and that's a that's a surprisingly
effective<


effective in aggregate metric because it
 


effective in aggregate metric because it
really<


really like nobody has the patience to
 


really like nobody has the patience to
be<


be able to talk to about that's not
 


be able to talk to about that's not
interesting<


interesting in intelligent and witty and
 


interesting in intelligent and witty and
is<


is able to go on the different tangents
 


is able to go on the different tangents
jump<


jump domains be able to you know say
 


jump domains be able to you know say
something<


something interesting to maintain your
 


something interesting to maintain your
attention<


attention maybe many humans whoops also
 


attention maybe many humans whoops also
fail<


fail this test
 


fail this test
unfortunately<


unfortunately we set just like with
 


unfortunately we set just like with
autonomous<


autonomous vehicles with chat BOTS we
 


autonomous vehicles with chat BOTS we
also<


also set a bar that's way too hard high
 


also set a bar that's way too hard high
to<


to reach I said you know the Turing test
 


to reach I said you know the Turing test
is<


is not as bad as some people believe you
 


is not as bad as some people believe you
got<


got what is really not useful about the
 


got what is really not useful about the
Turing<


Turing test it gives us no guidance how
 


Turing test it gives us no guidance how
to<


to develop these systems in the first
 


to develop these systems in the first
place<


place of course you know we can develop
 


place of course you know we can develop
them<


them by trial and error and you know do
 


them by trial and error and you know do
whatever<


whatever and and then run the test and
 


whatever and and then run the test and
see<


see whether it works or not but a
 


see whether it works or not but a
mathematical<


mathematical definition of intelligence
 


mathematical definition of intelligence
gives<


gives us you know an objective which we
 


gives us you know an objective which we
can<


can then analyze by you know theoretical
 


can then analyze by you know theoretical
tools<


tools or computational and you know
 


tools or computational and you know
maybe<


maybe improve how close we are and we
 


maybe improve how close we are and we
will<


will come back to that later with a sexy
 


will come back to that later with a sexy
model<


model so or I mention the compression
 


model so or I mention the compression
right<


right so in natural language processing
 


right so in natural language processing
and<


and they have chiefed amazing results
 


and they have chiefed amazing results
and<


and are one way to test this of course
 


and are one way to test this of course
you<


you know take the system you train it
 


you know take the system you train it
then<


then you you know see how well it
 


then you you know see how well it
performs<


performs on the task but a lot of
 


performs on the task but a lot of
performance<


performance measurement is done by so
 


performance measurement is done by so
called<


called perplexity this is essentially
 


called perplexity this is essentially
the<


the same as complexity or compression
 


the same as complexity or compression
length<


length so the NLP community develops new
 


length so the NLP community develops new
systems<


systems and then they measure the
 


systems and then they measure the
compression<


compression length and then they have
 


compression length and then they have
ranking<


ranking and leaks because there's a
 


ranking and leaks because there's a
strong<


strong correlation between compressing
 


strong correlation between compressing
well<


well and then this systems performing
 


well and then this systems performing
well<


well at the task at hand it's not
 


well at the task at hand it's not
perfect<


perfect but it's good enough for them as
 


perfect but it's good enough for them as
as<


as an intermediate aim
 


as an intermediate aim
so<


so you mean a measure so this is kind of
 


so you mean a measure so this is kind of
almost<


almost returning to the coma girl of
 


almost returning to the coma girl of
complexity<


complexity so you're saying good
 


complexity so you're saying good
compression<


compression usually means good
 


compression usually means good
intelligence<


intelligence yes
 


intelligence yes
so<


so you mentioned you're one of the one
 


so you mentioned you're one of the one
of<


of the only people who dared boldly to
 


of the only people who dared boldly to
try<


try to formalize our the idea of
 


try to formalize our the idea of
artificial<


artificial general intelligence to have
 


artificial general intelligence to have
a<


a a mathematical framework for
 


a a mathematical framework for
intelligence<


intelligence just like as we mentioned
 


intelligence just like as we mentioned
termed<


termed IHC AI X I so let me ask the
 


termed IHC AI X I so let me ask the
basic<


basic question what is IHC okay so let
 


basic question what is IHC okay so let
me<


me first say what it stands for because
 


me first say what it stands for because
letter<


letter stands for actually that's
 


letter stands for actually that's
probably<


probably the more basic question but it
 


probably the more basic question but it
the<


the first question is usually how how
 


the first question is usually how how
it's<


it's pronounced but finally I put it on
 


it's pronounced but finally I put it on
the<


the website how it's pronounced and you
 


the website how it's pronounced and you
figured<


figured it out yeah
 


figured it out yeah
the<


the name comes from AI artificial
 


the name comes from AI artificial
intelligence<


intelligence and the X I is the Greek
 


intelligence and the X I is the Greek
letter<


letter X I which are used for solo
 


letter X I which are used for solo
manav's<


manav's distribution for quite stupid
 


manav's distribution for quite stupid
reasons<


reasons which I'm not willing to repeat
 


reasons which I'm not willing to repeat
here<


here in front of camera so it just
 


here in front of camera so it just
happened<


happened to be more less arbitrary I
 


happened to be more less arbitrary I
chose<


chose to excite but it also has nice
 


chose to excite but it also has nice
other<


other interpretations so their actions
 


other interpretations so their actions
and<


and perceptions in this model write an
 


and perceptions in this model write an
agent<


agent his actions and perceptions and
 


agent his actions and perceptions and
overtime<


overtime so this is a Index IX index I
 


overtime so this is a Index IX index I
so<


so this action at time I and then
 


so this action at time I and then
followed<


followed by reception at time I will go
 


followed by reception at time I will go
with<


with that I let it out the first part
 


with that I let it out the first part
yes<


yes I'm just kidding I have some
 


yes I'm just kidding I have some
interpretations<


interpretations so at some point maybe
 


interpretations so at some point maybe
five<


five years ago or ten years ago I
 


five years ago or ten years ago I
discovered<


discovered in in Barcelona it wasn't a
 


discovered in in Barcelona it wasn't a
big<


big church there wasn't you know stone
 


big church there wasn't you know stone
engraved<


engraved some text and the word I see
 


engraved some text and the word I see
appeared<


appeared there I was very surprised and
 


appeared there I was very surprised and
and<


and and and happy about it and I looked
 


and and and happy about it and I looked
it<


it up so it is Catalan language and it
 


it up so it is Catalan language and it
means<


means with some interpretation of debts
 


means with some interpretation of debts
it<


it that's the right thing to do yeah
 


it that's the right thing to do yeah
Eureka<


Eureka Oh
 


Eureka Oh
so<


so it's almost like destined somehow
 


so it's almost like destined somehow
came<


came yeah yeah came to you in a dream
 


came yeah yeah came to you in a dream
so<


so Osceola there's a Chinese word I she
 


so Osceola there's a Chinese word I she
also<


also written a galaxy if you could
 


also written a galaxy if you could
transcribe<


transcribe that opinion then the final
 


transcribe that opinion then the final
one<


one is that is AI crossed with induction
 


one is that is AI crossed with induction
because<


because status and that's going more to
 


because status and that's going more to
the<


the content now so good old-fashioned AI
 


the content now so good old-fashioned AI
is<


is more about you know planning and
 


is more about you know planning and
known<


known data mystic world and induction is
 


known data mystic world and induction is
more<


more about often yellow area D data and
 


more about often yellow area D data and
inferring<


inferring models and essentially what
 


inferring models and essentially what
this<


this accident does is combining these
 


this accident does is combining these
two<


two and I actually also recently I think
 


two and I actually also recently I think
heard<


heard that in Japanese AI means love so
 


heard that in Japanese AI means love so
so<


so if you can combine excise somehow
 


so if you can combine excise somehow
with<


with that I think we can there might be
 


with that I think we can there might be
some<


some interesting ideas there so I let's
 


some interesting ideas there so I let's
then<


then take the next step can you maybe
 


then take the next step can you maybe
talk<


talk at the big level of what is this
 


talk at the big level of what is this
mathematical<


mathematical framework yeah so it
 


mathematical framework yeah so it
consists<


consists essentially of two parts one is
 


consists essentially of two parts one is
the<


the learning and induction and
 


the learning and induction and
prediction<


prediction part and the other one is the
 


prediction part and the other one is the
planning<


planning part
 


planning part
so<


so let's come first to the learning
 


so let's come first to the learning
induction<


induction prediction part which
 


induction prediction part which
essentially<


essentially I explained already before
 


essentially I explained already before
so<


so what we need for any agent to act
 


so what we need for any agent to act
well<


well is that it can somehow predict what
 


well is that it can somehow predict what
happens<


happens I mean if you have no idea what
 


happens I mean if you have no idea what
your<


your actions do how can you decide which
 


your actions do how can you decide which
acts<


acts not good or not so you need to have
 


acts not good or not so you need to have
some<


some model of what your actions affect
 


some model of what your actions affect
so<


so what you do is you have some
 


so what you do is you have some
experience<


experience you build models like
 


experience you build models like
scientists<


scientists you know of your experience
 


scientists you know of your experience
then<


then you hope these models are roughly
 


then you hope these models are roughly
correct<


correct and then you use these models
 


correct and then you use these models
for<


for prediction and the model is sorry to
 


for prediction and the model is sorry to
interrupt<


interrupt our model is based on you
 


interrupt our model is based on you
perception<


perception of the world how your actions
 


perception of the world how your actions
will<


will affect that world that's not so
 


will affect that world that's not so
what<


what is the important part but it is
 


what is the important part but it is
technically<


technically important but at this stage
 


technically important but at this stage
we<


we can just think about predicting say
 


we can just think about predicting say
stock<


stock market data whether data or IQ
 


stock market data whether data or IQ
sequences<


sequences one two three four five what
 


sequences one two three four five what
comes<


comes next yeah so of course our actions
 


comes next yeah so of course our actions
affect<


affect what we're doing but I come back
 


affect what we're doing but I come back
to<


to that in a second so and I'll keep
 


to that in a second so and I'll keep
just<


just interrupting so just to draw a line
 


just interrupting so just to draw a line
between<


between prediction and planning or what
 


between prediction and planning or what
do<


do you mean by prediction in this and
 


do you mean by prediction in this and
this<


this where it's trying to predict the
 


this where it's trying to predict the
environment<


environment without your long-term
 


environment without your long-term
action<


action in the environment
 


action in the environment
what<


what is prediction okay if you want to
 


what is prediction okay if you want to
put<


put the actions in now okay then let's
 


put the actions in now okay then let's
put<


put in a now yes so the question okay so
 


put in a now yes so the question okay so
this<


this is the simplest form of prediction
 


this is the simplest form of prediction
is<


is that you just have data which you
 


is that you just have data which you
passively<


passively observe yes and you want to
 


passively observe yes and you want to
predict<


predict what happens without you know
 


predict what happens without you know
interfering


interfering
 


interfering
as<


as I said weather forecasting stock
 


as I said weather forecasting stock
market<


market IQ sequences or just anything
 


market IQ sequences or just anything
okay<


okay and Salama of zeref interaction
 


okay and Salama of zeref interaction
based<


based on compression so you look for the
 


based on compression so you look for the
shortest<


shortest program which describes your
 


shortest program which describes your
data<


data sequence and then you take this
 


data sequence and then you take this
program<


program run it which reproduces your
 


program run it which reproduces your
data<


data sequence by definition and then you
 


data sequence by definition and then you
let<


let it continue running and then it will
 


let it continue running and then it will
produce<


produce some predictions and you can
 


produce some predictions and you can
rigorously<


rigorously prove that for any prediction
 


rigorously prove that for any prediction
task<


task this is essentially the best
 


task this is essentially the best
possible<


possible predictor of course if there's
 


possible predictor of course if there's
a<


a prediction task or tasks which is
 


a prediction task or tasks which is
unpredictable<


unpredictable like you know your fair
 


unpredictable like you know your fair
coin<


coin flips yeah I cannot predict the
 


coin flips yeah I cannot predict the
next<


next fair country but Solomon of Tarsus
 


next fair country but Solomon of Tarsus
says<


says okay next head is probably 50% it's
 


says okay next head is probably 50% it's
the<


the best you can do
 


the best you can do
so<


so if something is unpredictable Salama
 


so if something is unpredictable Salama
will<


will also not magically predicted but if
 


will also not magically predicted but if
there<


there is some pattern and predictability
 


there is some pattern and predictability
then<


then Solomonov induction we'll figure
 


then Solomonov induction we'll figure
that<


that out eventually and not just
 


that out eventually and not just
eventually<


eventually but rather quickly and you
 


eventually but rather quickly and you
can<


can have proof convergence rates
 


can have proof convergence rates
whatever<


whatever your data is so there's pure
 


whatever your data is so there's pure
magic<


magic in a sense what's the catch well
 


magic in a sense what's the catch well
the<


the catch is that is not computable and
 


the catch is that is not computable and
we<


we come back to that later you cannot
 


we come back to that later you cannot
just<


just implement it in even this
 


just implement it in even this
Google<


Google resources here and run it and you
 


Google resources here and run it and you
know<


know predict the stock market and become
 


know predict the stock market and become
rich<


rich I mean if ray solomonoff already
 


rich I mean if ray solomonoff already
not<


not write it at the time but the basic
 


not write it at the time but the basic
task<


task is you know you're in the
 


task is you know you're in the
environment<


environment and you're interacting with
 


environment and you're interacting with
an<


an environment to try to learn a model
 


an environment to try to learn a model
the<


the environment and the model is in the
 


the environment and the model is in the
space<


space as these all these programs and
 


space as these all these programs and
your<


your goal is to get a bunch of programs
 


your goal is to get a bunch of programs
that<


that are simple and so let's let's go to
 


that are simple and so let's let's go to
the<


the actions now but actually good that
 


the actions now but actually good that
you<


you asked usually I skip this part also
 


you asked usually I skip this part also
there<


there is also a minor contribution which
 


there is also a minor contribution which
I<


I did so the action part but they
 


I did so the action part but they
usually<


usually sort of just jump to the
 


usually sort of just jump to the
decision<


decision path so let me explain to the
 


decision path so let me explain to the
action<


action part now thanks for asking
 


action part now thanks for asking
so<


so you have to modify it a little bit by
 


so you have to modify it a little bit by
now<


now not just predicting a sequence which
 


now not just predicting a sequence which
just<


just comes to you
 


just comes to you
but<


but you have an observation then you act
 


but you have an observation then you act
somehow<


somehow and then you want to predict the
 


somehow and then you want to predict the
next<


next observation based on the past
 


next observation based on the past
observation<


observation and your action then you
 


observation and your action then you
take<


take the next action you don't care
 


take the next action you don't care
about<


about predicting it because you're doing
 


about predicting it because you're doing
it<


it and then you get the next observation
 


it and then you get the next observation
and<


and you want more before you get it you
 


and you want more before you get it you
want<


want to predict it again based on your
 


want to predict it again based on your
past<


past action and observation sequence
 


past action and observation sequence
it's<


it's just condition extra on your
 


it's just condition extra on your
actions<


actions there's an interesting
 


actions there's an interesting
alternative<


alternative that you also try to predict
 


alternative that you also try to predict
your<


your own actions if you want oh in the
 


your own actions if you want oh in the
past<


past or the future your future actions
 


past or the future your future actions
wait<


wait let me wrap I think my brain is
 


wait let me wrap I think my brain is
broke<


broke we should maybe discussed it later
 


broke we should maybe discussed it later
Biff<


Biff after I've explained the Ising
 


Biff after I've explained the Ising
model<


model it's an interesting variation but
 


model it's an interesting variation but
this<


this is a really interesting variation
 


this is a really interesting variation
and<


and a quick comment I don't know if you
 


and a quick comment I don't know if you
want<


want to insert that in here but you're
 


want to insert that in here but you're
looking<


looking at in terms of observations
 


looking at in terms of observations
you're<


you're looking at the entire the big
 


you're looking at the entire the big
history<


history a long history of the
 


history a long history of the
observations<


observations exactly it's very important
 


observations exactly it's very important
the<


the whole history from birth sort of of
 


the whole history from birth sort of of
the<


the agent and we can come back to that
 


the agent and we can come back to that
I'm<


I'm also why this is important here
 


I'm also why this is important here
often<


often you know in RL you have MVPs
 


often you know in RL you have MVPs
Markov<


Markov decision processes which are much
 


Markov decision processes which are much
more<


more limiting okay so now we can predict
 


more limiting okay so now we can predict
conditioned<


conditioned on actions so even if the
 


conditioned on actions so even if the
influenced<


influenced environment but prediction is
 


influenced environment but prediction is
not<


not all we want to do right we also want
 


not all we want to do right we also want
to<


to act really in the world and the
 


to act really in the world and the
question<


question is how to choose the actions
 


question is how to choose the actions
and<


and we don't want to greedily choose the
 


and we don't want to greedily choose the
actions<


actions you know
 


actions you know
just<


just you know what is best in in the
 


just you know what is best in in the
next<


next time step and we first I should say
 


next time step and we first I should say
you<


you know what is you know how to be
 


you know what is you know how to be
measure<


measure performance so we measure
 


measure performance so we measure
performance<


performance by giving the agent reward
 


performance by giving the agent reward
that's<


that's the so called reinforcement
 


that's the so called reinforcement
learning<


learning framework so every time step
 


learning framework so every time step
you<


you can give it a positive reward or
 


you can give it a positive reward or
negative<


negative reward or baby no reward it
 


negative reward or baby no reward it
could<


could be a very scarce right like if you
 


could be a very scarce right like if you
play<


play chess just at the end of the game
 


play chess just at the end of the game
you<


you give +1 for winning or -1 for losing
 


you give +1 for winning or -1 for losing
so<


so in the aixi framework that's
 


so in the aixi framework that's
completely<


completely sufficient so occasionally
 


completely sufficient so occasionally
you<


you give a reward signal and you ask the
 


you give a reward signal and you ask the
agent<


agent to maximise reverb but not
 


agent to maximise reverb but not
greedily<


greedily sort of you know the next one
 


greedily sort of you know the next one
next<


next one because that's very bad in the
 


next one because that's very bad in the
long<


long run if you're greedy so but over
 


long run if you're greedy so but over
the<


the lifetime of the agent so let's
 


the lifetime of the agent so let's
assume<


assume the agent lives for M times
 


assume the agent lives for M times
that'll<


that'll say it dies in sort of hundred
 


that'll say it dies in sort of hundred
years<


years sharp that's just you know the
 


years sharp that's just you know the
simplest<


simplest model to explain so it looks at
 


simplest model to explain so it looks at
the<


the future reward sum and ask what is my
 


the future reward sum and ask what is my
action<


action sequence or actually more
 


action sequence or actually more
precisely<


precisely my policy which leads in
 


precisely my policy which leads in
expectation<


expectation because I don't know the
 


expectation because I don't know the
world<


world to the maximum reward some let me
 


world to the maximum reward some let me
give<


give you an analogy in chess for
 


give you an analogy in chess for
instance<


instance we know how to play optimally
 


instance we know how to play optimally
in<


in theory it's just a minimax strategy I
 


in theory it's just a minimax strategy I
play<


play the move which seems best to me
 


play the move which seems best to me
under<


under the assumption that the opponent
 


under the assumption that the opponent
plays<


plays the move which is best for him so
 


plays the move which is best for him so
best<


best serve worst for me and the
 


best serve worst for me and the
assumption<


assumption that he I play again the best
 


assumption that he I play again the best
move<


move and then you have this expecting
 


move and then you have this expecting
max<


max three to the end of the game and
 


max three to the end of the game and
then<


then you back propagate and then you get
 


then you back propagate and then you get
the<


the best possible move so that is the
 


the best possible move so that is the
optimal<


optimal strategy which for norman
 


optimal strategy which for norman
already<


already figured out a long time ago for
 


already figured out a long time ago for
playing<


playing adversarial games luckily or
 


playing adversarial games luckily or
maybe<


maybe unluckily for the theory it
 


maybe unluckily for the theory it
becomes<


becomes harder the world is not always
 


becomes harder the world is not always
adversarial<


adversarial so it can be if the other
 


adversarial so it can be if the other
humans<


humans even cooperative fear or nature
 


humans even cooperative fear or nature
is<


is usually I mean the dead nature is
 


is usually I mean the dead nature is
stochastic<


stochastic you know you know things just
 


stochastic you know you know things just
happen<


happen randomly or I don't care about
 


happen randomly or I don't care about
you<


you so what you have to take into
 


you so what you have to take into
account<


account is a noise now and not
 


account is a noise now and not
necessarily<


necessarily Realty so you'll replace the
 


necessarily Realty so you'll replace the
minimum<


minimum on the opponent's side by an
 


minimum on the opponent's side by an
expectation<


expectation which is general enough to
 


expectation which is general enough to
include<


include also the serial cases so now
 


include also the serial cases so now
instead<


instead of a minimax trials you have an
 


instead of a minimax trials you have an
expecting<


expecting max strategy so far so good so
 


expecting max strategy so far so good so
that<


that is well known it's called
 


that is well known it's called
sequential<


sequential decision theory
 


sequential decision theory
but<


but the question is on which probability
 


but the question is on which probability
distribution<


distribution do you base that if I have
 


distribution do you base that if I have
the<


the true probability distribution like
 


the true probability distribution like
say<


say I play backgammon right there's dice
 


say I play backgammon right there's dice
and<


and there's certain randomness involved
 


and there's certain randomness involved
you<


you know I can calculate probabilities
 


you know I can calculate probabilities
and<


and feed it in the expecting max or the
 


and feed it in the expecting max or the
signature<


signature disease we come up is the
 


signature disease we come up is the
optimal<


optimal decision if I have enough
 


optimal decision if I have enough
compute<


compute but in the for the real world we
 


compute but in the for the real world we
don't<


don't know that you know what is the
 


don't know that you know what is the
probability<


probability you drive in front of me
 


probability you drive in front of me
brakes<


brakes and I don't know you know so
 


brakes and I don't know you know so
depends<


depends on all kinds of things and
 


depends on all kinds of things and
especially<


especially new situations I don't know
 


especially new situations I don't know
so<


so this is this unknown thing about
 


so this is this unknown thing about
prediction<


prediction and there's where solomonoff
 


prediction and there's where solomonoff
comes<


comes in so what you do is in sequential
 


comes in so what you do is in sequential
decision<


decision jury it just replace the true
 


decision jury it just replace the true
distribution<


distribution which we don't know by this
 


distribution which we don't know by this
Universal<


Universal distribution I didn't
 


Universal distribution I didn't
explicitly<


explicitly talk about it but this is
 


explicitly talk about it but this is
used<


used for universal prediction and plug
 


used for universal prediction and plug
it<


it into the sequential decision tree
 


it into the sequential decision tree
mechanism<


mechanism and then you get the best of
 


mechanism and then you get the best of
both<


both worlds you have a long-term
 


both worlds you have a long-term
planning<


planning agent but it doesn't need to
 


planning agent but it doesn't need to
know<


know anything about the world because
 


know anything about the world because
there's<


there's a lot of induction part learns
 


there's a lot of induction part learns
can<


can you explicitly try to describe the
 


can you explicitly try to describe the
universal<


universal distribution and how some of
 


universal distribution and how some of
induction<


induction plays a role here yeah I'm
 


induction plays a role here yeah I'm
trying<


trying to understand so what it does it
 


trying to understand so what it does it
I'm<


I'm so in the simplest case I said take
 


I'm so in the simplest case I said take
the<


the shortest program describing your
 


the shortest program describing your
data<


data run it have a prediction which
 


data run it have a prediction which
would<


would be deterministic yes okay but you
 


would be deterministic yes okay but you
should<


should not just take a shortest program
 


should not just take a shortest program
but<


but also consider the longer ones but
 


but also consider the longer ones but
keep<


keep it lower a priori probability so in
 


keep it lower a priori probability so in
the<


the Bayesian framework you say a priori
 


the Bayesian framework you say a priori
any<


any distribution which is a model or
 


any distribution which is a model or
stochastic<


stochastic program has a certain a
 


stochastic program has a certain a
priori<


priori probability which is 2 to the
 


priori probability which is 2 to the
minus<


minus and Y to the minus length you know
 


minus and Y to the minus length you know
I<


I could explain length of this program
 


I could explain length of this program
so<


so longer programs are punished yes a
 


so longer programs are punished yes a
priori<


priori and then you multiplied with the
 


priori and then you multiplied with the
so-called<


so-called likelihood function yeah which
 


so-called likelihood function yeah which
is<


is as the name suggests is how likely is
 


is as the name suggests is how likely is
this<


this model given the data at hand so if
 


this model given the data at hand so if
you<


you have a very wrong model it's very
 


you have a very wrong model it's very
unlikely<


unlikely that this model is true so it
 


unlikely that this model is true so it
is<


is very small number so even if the
 


is very small number so even if the
model<


model is simple it gets penalized by
 


model is simple it gets penalized by
that<


that and what you do is then you take
 


that and what you do is then you take
just


just
 


just
the<


the some word this is the average over
 


the some word this is the average over
it<


it and this gives you a probability
 


it and this gives you a probability
distribution<


distribution so with universal
 


distribution so with universal
distribution<


distribution of phenomena of
 


distribution of phenomena of
distribution<


distribution so it's weighed by the
 


distribution so it's weighed by the
simplicity<


simplicity of the program and likelihood
 


simplicity of the program and likelihood
yes<


yes it's kind of a nice idea yeah so
 


yes it's kind of a nice idea yeah so
okay<


okay and then you said there's you're
 


okay and then you said there's you're
playing<


playing N or M or forgot the letter
 


playing N or M or forgot the letter
steps<


steps into the future so how difficult
 


steps into the future so how difficult
is<


is that problem what's involved there
 


is that problem what's involved there
okay<


okay so here's a customization problem
 


okay so here's a customization problem
what<


what do we do yes so you have a planning
 


what do we do yes so you have a planning
problem<


problem up to horizon M and that's
 


problem up to horizon M and that's
exponential<


exponential time in in the horizon M
 


exponential time in in the horizon M
which<


which is I mean it's computable but in
 


which is I mean it's computable but in
fact<


fact intractable I mean even for chess
 


fact intractable I mean even for chess
it's<


it's already intractable to do that
 


it's already intractable to do that
exactly<


exactly and you know it could be also
 


exactly and you know it could be also
discounted<


discounted kind of framework or yes so
 


discounted kind of framework or yes so
so<


so having a heart arising you know at
 


so having a heart arising you know at
numbered<


numbered years it's just for simplicity
 


numbered years it's just for simplicity
of<


of discussing the model and also
 


of discussing the model and also
sometimes<


sometimes the math is simple but there
 


sometimes the math is simple but there
are<


are lots of variations actually quite
 


are lots of variations actually quite
interesting<


interesting parameter is its there's
 


interesting parameter is its there's
nothing<


nothing really problematic about it but
 


nothing really problematic about it but
it's<


it's very interesting so for instance
 


it's very interesting so for instance
you<


you think no let's let's then let's let
 


you think no let's let's then let's let
the<


the parameter M tend to infinity right
 


the parameter M tend to infinity right
you<


you want an agent which lives forever
 


you want an agent which lives forever
all<


all right if you do it novel you have
 


all right if you do it novel you have
two<


two problems first the mathematics
 


two problems first the mathematics
breaks<


breaks down because you have an infinite
 


breaks down because you have an infinite
reward<


reward some which may give infinity and
 


reward some which may give infinity and
getting<


getting river 0.1 in the time step is
 


getting river 0.1 in the time step is
infinity<


infinity and giving you got one every
 


infinity and giving you got one every
time<


time service Definity so equally good
 


time service Definity so equally good
not<


not really what we want other problem is
 


not really what we want other problem is
that<


that if you have an infinite life you
 


that if you have an infinite life you
can<


can be lazy for as long as you want for
 


can be lazy for as long as you want for
ten<


ten years yeah and then catch up with
 


ten years yeah and then catch up with
the<


the same expected reward and you know
 


the same expected reward and you know
think<


think about yourself or you know or
 


think about yourself or you know or
maybe<


maybe you know some friends or so if
 


maybe you know some friends or so if
they<


they knew they lived forever you know
 


they knew they lived forever you know
why<


why work hard now you know just enjoy
 


why work hard now you know just enjoy
your<


your life you know and then catch up
 


your life you know and then catch up
later<


later so that's another problem with
 


later so that's another problem with
infinite<


infinite horizon and you mentioned yes
 


infinite horizon and you mentioned yes
we<


we can go to discounting but then the
 


we can go to discounting but then the
standard<


standard discounting is so called
 


standard discounting is so called
geometric<


geometric discounting so $1 today is
 


geometric discounting so $1 today is
about<


about worth as much as you know one
 


about worth as much as you know one
dollar<


dollar and five cents tomorrow so if you
 


dollar and five cents tomorrow so if you
do<


do this so called geometric discounting
 


do this so called geometric discounting
you<


you have introduced an effective horizon
 


you have introduced an effective horizon
so<


so the Aged is now motivated to
 


so the Aged is now motivated to
had<


had a certain amount of time effectively
 


had a certain amount of time effectively
it's<


it's likely moving horizon and for any
 


it's likely moving horizon and for any
fixed<


fixed effective horizon there is a
 


fixed effective horizon there is a
problem<


problem to solve which requires larger
 


problem to solve which requires larger
horizon<


horizon so if I look ahead you know five
 


horizon so if I look ahead you know five
time<


time steps I'm a terrible chess player
 


time steps I'm a terrible chess player
right<


right and I'll need to look ahead longer
 


right and I'll need to look ahead longer
if<


if I play go I probably have to look
 


if I play go I probably have to look
ahead<


ahead even longer so for every problem
 


ahead even longer so for every problem
there<


there forever horizon there is a problem
 


there forever horizon there is a problem
which<


which this horizon cannot solve yes but
 


which this horizon cannot solve yes but
I<


I introduced the so-called near harmonic
 


I introduced the so-called near harmonic
horizon<


horizon which goes down with one or tea
 


horizon which goes down with one or tea
rather<


rather than exponential in T which
 


rather than exponential in T which
produces<


produces an agent which effectively
 


produces an agent which effectively
looks<


looks into the future proportional to
 


looks into the future proportional to
its<


its age so if it's five years old it
 


its age so if it's five years old it
plans<


plans for five years if it's hundred
 


plans for five years if it's hundred
years<


years older than plans for hundred years
 


years older than plans for hundred years
interesting<


interesting and a little bit similar to
 


interesting and a little bit similar to
humans<


humans - right and my children don't
 


humans - right and my children don't
plan<


plan ahead very long but then we get the
 


plan ahead very long but then we get the
doll<


doll - a player I had more longer maybe
 


doll - a player I had more longer maybe
when<


when we get all very old I mean we know
 


when we get all very old I mean we know
that<


that we don't live forever and you're
 


that we don't live forever and you're
maybe<


maybe then how horizon shrinks again so
 


maybe then how horizon shrinks again so
just<


just adjusting the horizon what is there
 


just adjusting the horizon what is there
some<


some mathematical benefit of that of or
 


some mathematical benefit of that of or
is<


is just a nice I mean intuitively
 


is just a nice I mean intuitively
empirically<


empirically probably a good idea to sort
 


empirically probably a good idea to sort
of<


of push the horizon back to uh extend
 


of push the horizon back to uh extend
the<


the horizon as you experience more of
 


the horizon as you experience more of
the<


the world but is there some mathematical
 


the world but is there some mathematical
conclusions<


conclusions here that are beneficial mr.
 


conclusions here that are beneficial mr.
Loman<


Loman who talks just a prediction
 


Loman who talks just a prediction
probably<


probably have extremely strong finite
 


probably have extremely strong finite
time<


time but no finite data result so you
 


time but no finite data result so you
have<


have sown so much data then you lose on
 


have sown so much data then you lose on
so<


so much so so the dt r is really great
 


so much so so the dt r is really great
with<


with the aixi model with the planning
 


with the aixi model with the planning
part<


part many results are only asymptotic
 


part many results are only asymptotic
which<


which well this is what is asymptotic
 


which well this is what is asymptotic
means<


means you can prove for instance that in
 


means you can prove for instance that in
the<


the long run if the agent you know x
 


the long run if the agent you know x
long<


long enough then you know it performs
 


long enough then you know it performs
optimal<


optimal or some nice things happens so
 


optimal or some nice things happens so
but<


but you don't know how fast it converges
 


but you don't know how fast it converges
yeah<


yeah so it may converge fast but we're
 


yeah so it may converge fast but we're
just<


 
 


 
difficult<


difficult so that is really dead slow
 


difficult so that is really dead slow
yeah<


yeah so so that is what asymptotic means
 


yeah so so that is what asymptotic means
sort<


sort of eventually but we don't know how
 


sort of eventually but we don't know how
fast<


fast and if I give the agent a fixed
 


fast and if I give the agent a fixed
horizon<


horizon M
 


horizon M
yeah<


yeah then I cannot prove asymptotic
 


yeah then I cannot prove asymptotic
results<


results right so I mean sort of people
 


results right so I mean sort of people
dies<


dies in hundred years then and hundred
 


dies in hundred years then and hundred
uses<


uses over cannot say eventually so this
 


uses over cannot say eventually so this
is<


is the advantage of the discounting that
 


is the advantage of the discounting that
I<


I can prove on some topic results so
 


I can prove on some topic results so
just<


just to clarify so so I okay I made I've
 


just to clarify so so I okay I made I've
built<


built up a model well now in a moment
 


built up a model well now in a moment
I've<


I've have this way of looking several
 


I've have this way of looking several
steps<


steps ahead how do I pick what action I
 


steps ahead how do I pick what action I
will<


will take it's like with a playing chess
 


will take it's like with a playing chess
right<


right you do this minimax
 


right you do this minimax
in<


in this case here do expect the max
 


in this case here do expect the max
based<


based on the selamat of distribution you
 


based on the selamat of distribution you
propagate<


propagate back and then while inaction
 


propagate back and then while inaction
falls<


falls out the action which maximizes the
 


falls out the action which maximizes the
future<


future expected reward on the Solano's
 


future expected reward on the Solano's
distribution<


distribution and then you just take this
 


distribution and then you just take this
action<


action and then repeat until you get a
 


action and then repeat until you get a
new<


new observation and you feed it in this
 


new observation and you feed it in this
excellent<


excellent observation then you repeat
 


excellent observation then you repeat
and<


and the reward so on yeah so you're a
 


and the reward so on yeah so you're a
row<


row - yeah and then maybe you can even
 


row - yeah and then maybe you can even
predict<


predict your own action however the idea
 


predict your own action however the idea
but<


but okay this big framework what is it
 


but okay this big framework what is it
this<


this is I mean it's kind of a beautiful
 


this is I mean it's kind of a beautiful
mathematical<


mathematical framework to think about
 


mathematical framework to think about
artificial<


artificial general intelligence what can
 


artificial general intelligence what can
you<


you what does it help you into it about
 


you what does it help you into it about
how<


how to build such systems or maybe from
 


how to build such systems or maybe from
another<


another perspective what does it help us
 


another perspective what does it help us
to<


to in understanding AGI so when I
 


to in understanding AGI so when I
started<


started in the field I was always
 


started in the field I was always
interested<


interested two things one was you know
 


interested two things one was you know
AGI<


AGI i'm the name didn't exist 10 24th of
 


AGI i'm the name didn't exist 10 24th of
january<


january iowa strong AI and physics he
 


january iowa strong AI and physics he
over<


over everything so i switched back and
 


over everything so i switched back and
forth<


forth between computer science and
 


forth between computer science and
physics<


physics quite often you said the theory
 


physics quite often you said the theory
of<


of everything the theory of everything
 


of everything the theory of everything
just<


just alike it was a basically the string
 


just alike it was a basically the string
of<


of flavors problems before all all of
 


of flavors problems before all all of
humanity<


humanity yeah I can explain if you
 


humanity yeah I can explain if you
wanted<


wanted some later time you know why I'm
 


wanted some later time you know why I'm
interesting<


interesting these two questions Nestle
 


interesting these two questions Nestle
and<


and a small tangent if if if one to be
 


and a small tangent if if if one to be
it<


it was one to be solved which one would
 


it was one to be solved which one would
you<


you if one if you were if an apple found
 


you if one if you were if an apple found
you


you
 


you
head<


head and there was a brilliant insight
 


head and there was a brilliant insight
and<


and you could arrive at the solution to
 


and you could arrive at the solution to
one<


one would it be AGI or the theory of
 


one would it be AGI or the theory of
everything


everything
 


everything
definitely<


definitely AGI because once the AGI
 


definitely AGI because once the AGI
problem<


problem solve they can ask the AGI to
 


problem solve they can ask the AGI to
solve<


solve the other problem for me yeah
 


solve the other problem for me yeah
brilliant<


brilliant a put okay so so as you were
 


brilliant a put okay so so as you were
saying<


saying about it okay so and the reason
 


saying about it okay so and the reason
why<


why I didn't settle I mean this thought
 


why I didn't settle I mean this thought
about<


about you know once we have solved HDI
 


about you know once we have solved HDI
it<


it solves all kinds of other not just as
 


it solves all kinds of other not just as
here<


here every problem about all kinds of
 


here every problem about all kinds of
use<


use more useful problems to humanity
 


use more useful problems to humanity
it's<


it's very appealing to many people and
 


it's very appealing to many people and
you<


you know I thought also that I was quite
 


you know I thought also that I was quite
disappointed<


disappointed with the state of the art
 


disappointed with the state of the art
of<


of the field of AI there was some theory
 


of the field of AI there was some theory
you<


you know about logical reasoning but I
 


you know about logical reasoning but I
was<


was never convinced that this will fly
 


was never convinced that this will fly
and<


and then there was this Homer more
 


and then there was this Homer more
holistic<


holistic approaches with neural networks
 


holistic approaches with neural networks
and<


and I didn't like these heuristics so
 


and I didn't like these heuristics so
and<


and also I didn't have any good idea
 


and also I didn't have any good idea
myself<


myself so that's the reason why I toggle
 


myself so that's the reason why I toggle
back<


back and forth quite some violent even
 


back and forth quite some violent even
worked<


worked some four and a half years and a
 


worked some four and a half years and a
company<


company developing software something
 


company developing software something
completely<


completely unrelated but then I had this
 


completely unrelated but then I had this
idea<


idea about the aixi model and so what it
 


idea about the aixi model and so what it
gives<


gives you it gives you a gold standard
 


gives you it gives you a gold standard
so<


so I have proven that this is the most
 


so I have proven that this is the most
intelligent<


intelligent agents which anybody could
 


intelligent agents which anybody could
build<


build built in quotation mark right
 


build built in quotation mark right
because<


because it's just mathematical and you
 


because it's just mathematical and you
need<


need infinite compute yeah but this is
 


need infinite compute yeah but this is
the<


the limit and this is completely
 


the limit and this is completely
specified<


specified it's not just a framework and
 


specified it's not just a framework and
it<


it you know every year tens of
 


it you know every year tens of
frameworks<


frameworks are developed with just have
 


frameworks are developed with just have
skeletons<


skeletons and then pieces are missing
 


skeletons and then pieces are missing
and<


and usually these missing pieces you
 


and usually these missing pieces you
know<


know turn out to be really really
 


know turn out to be really really
difficult<


difficult and so this is completely and
 


difficult and so this is completely and
uniquely<


uniquely defined and we can analyze that
 


uniquely defined and we can analyze that
mathematically<


mathematically and we've also developed
 


mathematically and we've also developed
some<


some approximations I can talk about it
 


some approximations I can talk about it
a<


a little bit later that would dissolve
 


a little bit later that would dissolve
the<


the top-down approach like say for
 


the top-down approach like say for
Norman's<


Norman's minimax theory that's the
 


Norman's minimax theory that's the
theoretical<


theoretical optimal play of games and
 


theoretical optimal play of games and
now<


now we need to approximate it put
 


now we need to approximate it put
heuristics<


heuristics in prune the tree blah blah
 


heuristics in prune the tree blah blah
blah<


blah and so on so we can do that also
 


blah and so on so we can do that also
with<


with an icy body but for generally I
 


with an icy body but for generally I
it<


it can also inspire those and most of
 


it can also inspire those and most of
most<


most researchers go bottom-up right they
 


most researchers go bottom-up right they
have<


have the systems that try to make it
 


have the systems that try to make it
more<


more general more intelligent it can
 


more general more intelligent it can
inspire<


inspire in which direction to go what do
 


inspire in which direction to go what do
you<


you mean by that so if you have some
 


you mean by that so if you have some
choice<


choice to make right so how should they
 


choice to make right so how should they
evaluate<


evaluate my system if I can't do cross
 


evaluate my system if I can't do cross
validation<


validation how should I do my learning
 


validation how should I do my learning
if<


if my standard regularization doesn't
 


if my standard regularization doesn't
work<


work well you know so the answer is
 


work well you know so the answer is
always<


always this we have a system which does
 


always this we have a system which does
everything<


everything that's actually it's just you
 


everything that's actually it's just you
know<


know completing the ivory tower
 


know completing the ivory tower
completely<


completely useless from a practical
 


completely useless from a practical
point<


point of view but you can look at it and
 


point of view but you can look at it and
see<


see oh yeah maybe you know I can take
 


see oh yeah maybe you know I can take
some<


some aspects and you know instead of
 


some aspects and you know instead of
Kolmogorov<


Kolmogorov complexity there just take
 


Kolmogorov complexity there just take
some<


some compressors which has been
 


some compressors which has been
developed<


developed so far and for the planning
 


developed so far and for the planning
well<


well we have used it here which is also
 


well we have used it here which is also
you<


you know being used in go and it at
 


you know being used in go and it at
least<


least it's inspired me a lot to have
 


least it's inspired me a lot to have
this<


this formal definition and if you look
 


this formal definition and if you look
at<


at other fields you know like I always
 


at other fields you know like I always
come<


come back to physics because I'm a
 


come back to physics because I'm a
physics<


physics background think about the
 


physics background think about the
Phenom<


Phenom of energy that was long time a
 


Phenom of energy that was long time a
mysterious<


mysterious concept and at some point it
 


mysterious concept and at some point it
was<


was completely formalized and that
 


was completely formalized and that
really<


really helped a lot and you can point
 


really helped a lot and you can point
out<


out a lot of these things which were
 


out a lot of these things which were
first<


first mysterious and wake and then they
 


first mysterious and wake and then they
have<


have been rigorously formalized speed
 


have been rigorously formalized speed
and<


and acceleration has been confused tried
 


and acceleration has been confused tried
until<


until it was formally defined here there
 


until it was formally defined here there
was<


was a time like this and in people you
 


was a time like this and in people you
know<


know often you know know don't have any
 


know often you know know don't have any
background<


background you know still confused it so
 


background you know still confused it so
and<


and this is a model or the the
 


and this is a model or the the
intelligence<


intelligence definitions which is sort
 


intelligence definitions which is sort
of<


of the dual to it we come back to that
 


of the dual to it we come back to that
later<


later formalizes the notion of
 


later formalizes the notion of
intelligence<


intelligence uniquely and rigorously so
 


intelligence uniquely and rigorously so
in<


in in the sense it serves as kind of the
 


in in the sense it serves as kind of the
light<


light at the end of the tunnel so before
 


light at the end of the tunnel so before
yeah<


yeah so I mean there's a million
 


yeah so I mean there's a million
question<


question I could ask her so maybe the
 


question I could ask her so maybe the
kind<


kind of ok let's feel around in the dark
 


kind of ok let's feel around in the dark
a<


a little bit so there's been here a deep
 


a little bit so there's been here a deep
mind<


mind but in general been a lot of
 


mind but in general been a lot of
breakthrough<


breakthrough ideas just like we've been
 


breakthrough ideas just like we've been
saying<


saying around reinforcement learning so
 


saying around reinforcement learning so
how<


how do you see the progress in
 


how do you see the progress in
reinforcement<


reinforcement learning is different like
 


reinforcement learning is different like
which<


which subset of IHC does it occupy
 


which subset of IHC does it occupy
the<


the current like you said the maybe the
 


the current like you said the maybe the
Markov<


Markov assumptions made quite often in
 


Markov assumptions made quite often in
reinforce<


reinforce for learning the there's other
 


reinforce for learning the there's other
assumptions<


assumptions made in order to make the
 


assumptions made in order to make the
system<


system work what do you see is the
 


system work what do you see is the
difference<


difference connection between
 


difference connection between
reinforcement<


reinforcement learning in Nyack see and
 


reinforcement learning in Nyack see and
so<


so the major difference is that
 


so the major difference is that
essentially<


essentially all other approaches they
 


essentially all other approaches they
make<


make stronger assumptions so in
 


make stronger assumptions so in
reinforcement<


reinforcement learning the Markov
 


reinforcement learning the Markov
assumption<


assumption is that the the next state or
 


assumption is that the the next state or
next<


next observation only depends on the on
 


next observation only depends on the on
the<


the previous observation and not the
 


the previous observation and not the
whole<


whole history which makes of course the
 


whole history which makes of course the
mathematics<


mathematics much easier and rather than
 


mathematics much easier and rather than
dealing<


dealing with histories of course their
 


dealing with histories of course their
profit<


profit from it also because then you
 


profit from it also because then you
have<


have algorithms that run on current
 


have algorithms that run on current
computers<


computers and do something practically
 


computers and do something practically
useful<


useful but for generally are all the
 


useful but for generally are all the
assumptions<


assumptions which are made by other
 


assumptions which are made by other
approaches<


approaches we know already now they are
 


approaches we know already now they are
limiting<


limiting so for instance usually you
 


limiting so for instance usually you
need<


need a go digital assumption in the MDP
 


need a go digital assumption in the MDP
frameworks<


frameworks in order to learn it goes
 


frameworks in order to learn it goes
this<


this T essentially means that you can
 


this T essentially means that you can
recover<


recover from your mistakes and that they
 


recover from your mistakes and that they
are<


are not traps in the environment and if
 


are not traps in the environment and if
you<


you make this assumption then
 


you make this assumption then
essentially<


essentially it can you know go back to a
 


essentially it can you know go back to a
previous<


previous state go there a couple of
 


previous state go there a couple of
times<


times and then learn what what
 


times and then learn what what
statistics<


statistics and what the state is like
 


statistics and what the state is like
and<


and then in the long run perform well in
 


and then in the long run perform well in
this<


this state yeah but there are no
 


this state yeah but there are no
fundamental<


fundamental problems but in real life we
 


fundamental problems but in real life we
know<


know you know there can be one single
 


know you know there can be one single
action<


action you know one second of being
 


action you know one second of being
inattentive<


inattentive while driving a car fast you
 


inattentive while driving a car fast you
know<


know you can ruin the rest of my life I
 


know you can ruin the rest of my life I
can<


can become quadriplegic or whatever so
 


can become quadriplegic or whatever so
and<


and there's no recovery anymore so the
 


and there's no recovery anymore so the
real<


real world is not err gorica I always
 


real world is not err gorica I always
say<


say you know there are traps and there
 


say you know there are traps and there
are<


are situations we are not recover from
 


are situations we are not recover from
and<


and very little theory has been
 


and very little theory has been
developed<


developed for this case what about what
 


developed for this case what about what
do<


do you see in there in the context of I
 


do you see in there in the context of I
see<


 
 


 
you<


you mentioned you know in the in the
 


you mentioned you know in the in the
real<


real world and get into trouble when we
 


real world and get into trouble when we
make<


make the wrong decisions and really pay
 


make the wrong decisions and really pay
for<


for it but exploration it seems to be
 


for it but exploration it seems to be
fundamentally


fundamentally
 


fundamentally
important<


important for learning about this world
 


important for learning about this world
for<


for gaining new knowledge so is it his
 


for gaining new knowledge so is it his
exploration<


exploration baked in another way to ask
 


exploration baked in another way to ask
it<


it what are the parameters of this of
 


it what are the parameters of this of
IHC<


IHC it can be controlled yeah I say the
 


IHC it can be controlled yeah I say the
good<


good thing is that there are no
 


good thing is that there are no
parameters<


parameters to control and some other
 


parameters to control and some other
people<


people track knobs to control and you
 


people track knobs to control and you
can<


can do that I mean you can modify axes
 


can do that I mean you can modify axes
so<


so that you have some knobs to play with
 


so that you have some knobs to play with
if<


if you want to but the exploration is
 


if you want to but the exploration is
directly<


directly baked in and that comes from
 


directly baked in and that comes from
the<


the Bayesian learning and the long-term
 


the Bayesian learning and the long-term
planning


planning
 


planning
so<


so these together already imply
 


so these together already imply
exploration<


exploration you can nicely and
 


exploration you can nicely and
explicitly<


explicitly prove that for simple
 


explicitly prove that for simple
problems<


problems like so-called banded problems
 


problems like so-called banded problems
where<


where you say to give a real world
 


where you say to give a real world
example<


example say you have two medical
 


example say you have two medical
treatments<


treatments a and B you don't know the
 


treatments a and B you don't know the
effectiveness<


effectiveness you try a a little bit be
 


effectiveness you try a a little bit be
a<


a little bit but you don't want to harm
 


a little bit but you don't want to harm
too<


too many patients so you have to sort of
 


too many patients so you have to sort of
trade-off<


trade-off exploring yeah and at some
 


trade-off exploring yeah and at some
point<


point you want to explore and you can do
 


point you want to explore and you can do
the<


the mathematics and figure out the
 


the mathematics and figure out the
optimal<


optimal strategy it took a Bayesian
 


optimal strategy it took a Bayesian
agency<


agency also non-bayesian agents but it
 


agency also non-bayesian agents but it
shows<


shows that this Bayesian framework by
 


shows that this Bayesian framework by
taking<


taking a prior over possible world's
 


taking a prior over possible world's
doing<


doing the Bayesian mixture then the
 


doing the Bayesian mixture then the
Bayes<


Bayes optimal decision with long term
 


Bayes optimal decision with long term
planning<


planning that is important automatically
 


planning that is important automatically
implies<


implies exploration also to the proper
 


implies exploration also to the proper
extent<


extent not to much exploration and not
 


extent not to much exploration and not
too<


too little in this very simple settings
 


too little in this very simple settings
in<


in the IHC model and was also able to
 


in the IHC model and was also able to
prove<


prove that it is a self optimizing
 


prove that it is a self optimizing
theorem<


theorem or asymptotic optimality
 


theorem or asymptotic optimality
theorems<


theorems or later only asymptotic not
 


theorems or later only asymptotic not
finite<


finite time bounds it seems like the
 


finite time bounds it seems like the
long<


long term planning is a really important
 


long term planning is a really important
but<


but the long term part of the planet is
 


but the long term part of the planet is
really<


really important yes and also I mean
 


really important yes and also I mean
maybe<


maybe a quick tangent how important do
 


maybe a quick tangent how important do
you<


you think is removing the Markov
 


you think is removing the Markov
assumption<


assumption and looking at the full
 


assumption and looking at the full
history<


history sort of intuitively of course
 


history sort of intuitively of course
it's<


it's important but is it like
 


it's important but is it like
fundamentally<


fundamentally transformative to the
 


fundamentally transformative to the
entirety<


entirety of the problem what's your
 


entirety of the problem what's your
sense<


sense of it like because we all
 


sense of it like because we all
we<


we make that assumption quite often it's
 


we make that assumption quite often it's
just<


just throwing away the past now I think
 


just throwing away the past now I think
it's<


it's absolutely crucial the question is
 


it's absolutely crucial the question is
whether<


whether there's a way to deal with it in
 


whether there's a way to deal with it in
a<


a more holistic and still sufficiently
 


a more holistic and still sufficiently
well<


well way so I have to come up with an
 


well way so I have to come up with an
example<


example and fly but you know you have
 


example and fly but you know you have
say<


say some you know key event in your life
 


say some you know key event in your life
you<


you know a long time ago you know in
 


you know a long time ago you know in
some<


some city or something you realize you
 


some city or something you realize you
know<


know that's a really dangerous street or
 


know that's a really dangerous street or
whatever<


whatever right here and you want to
 


whatever right here and you want to
remember<


remember that forever right in case you
 


remember that forever right in case you
come<


come back they're kind of a selective
 


come back they're kind of a selective
kind<


kind of memory so you remember that all
 


kind of memory so you remember that all
the<


the important events in the past but
 


the important events in the past but
somehow<


somehow selecting the importance is see
 


somehow selecting the importance is see
that's<


that's very hard yeah and I'm not
 


that's very hard yeah and I'm not
concerned<


concerned about you know just storing
 


concerned about you know just storing
the<


the whole history just you can calculate
 


the whole history just you can calculate
you<


you know human life says so you're 100
 


you know human life says so you're 100
years<


years doesn't matter right how much data
 


years doesn't matter right how much data
comes<


comes in through the vision system and
 


comes in through the vision system and
the<


the auditory system you compress it a
 


the auditory system you compress it a
little<


little bit in this case law silly and
 


little bit in this case law silly and
store<


store it we are soon in the means of
 


store it we are soon in the means of
just<


just storing it yeah but you still need
 


just storing it yeah but you still need
to<


to the selection for the planning part
 


to the selection for the planning part
and<


and the compression for the
 


and the compression for the
understanding<


understanding part the raw storage I'm
 


understanding part the raw storage I'm
really<


really not concerned about and I think
 


really not concerned about and I think
we<


we should just store if you develop an
 


we should just store if you develop an
agent<


agent preferably just restore all the
 


agent preferably just restore all the
interaction<


interaction history and then you build
 


interaction history and then you build
of<


of course models on top of it and you
 


of course models on top of it and you
compress<


compress it and you are selective but
 


compress it and you are selective but
occasionally<


occasionally you go back to the old data
 


occasionally you go back to the old data
and<


and reanalyze it based on your new
 


and reanalyze it based on your new
experience<


experience you have you know sometimes
 


experience you have you know sometimes
you<


you you're in school you learn all these
 


you you're in school you learn all these
things<


things you think it's totally useless
 


things you think it's totally useless
and<


and you know much later you realize not
 


and you know much later you realize not
you<


you know it looks like as you thought
 


you know it looks like as you thought
I'm<


I'm looking at you linear algebra right
 


I'm looking at you linear algebra right
so<


so maybe a minute let me ask about
 


so maybe a minute let me ask about
objective<


objective functions because that rewards
 


objective functions because that rewards
it<


it seems to be an important part the
 


it seems to be an important part the
rewards<


rewards are kind of given to the system
 


rewards are kind of given to the system
for<


for a lot of people the the
 


for a lot of people the the
specification<


specification of the objective function
 


specification of the objective function
is<


is a key part of intelligence like the
 


is a key part of intelligence like the
the<


the agent itself figuring out what is
 


the agent itself figuring out what is
important<


important what do you think about that
 


important what do you think about that
is<


is it possible within IHC framework to
 


is it possible within IHC framework to
yourself<


yourself discover the reward based on
 


yourself discover the reward based on
which<


which you should operate okay that'll be
 


which you should operate okay that'll be
a<


a long answer so and it is a very
 


a long answer so and it is a very
interesting<


interesting question and I asked a lot
 


interesting question and I asked a lot
about<


about this question where do the rivers
 


about this question where do the rivers
come<


come from and that depends yeah so and
 


come from and that depends yeah so and
there<


there you know I give you now a couple
 


there you know I give you now a couple
of<


of answers so if you want to build
 


of answers so if you want to build
agents<


agents now let's start simple so let's
 


agents now let's start simple so let's
assume<


assume we want to build an agent based
 


assume we want to build an agent based
on<


on the aixi model which performs a
 


on the aixi model which performs a
particular<


particular task let's start with
 


particular task let's start with
something<


something super simple like I mean super
 


something super simple like I mean super
simple<


simple like playing chess or go or
 


simple like playing chess or go or
something<


something yeah then you just you know
 


something yeah then you just you know
the<


the reward is you know winning the game
 


the reward is you know winning the game
is<


is plus one losing theorems minus one
 


is plus one losing theorems minus one
done<


done you apply this agent if you have
 


done you apply this agent if you have
enough<


enough compute you let itself play and
 


enough compute you let itself play and
it<


it will learn the rules of the game will
 


it will learn the rules of the game will
play<


play perfect chess
 


play perfect chess
after<


after some while problem solve okay so
 


after some while problem solve okay so
if<


if you have more complicated problems
 


if you have more complicated problems
then<


then you may believe that you have the
 


then you may believe that you have the
right<


right rewrote but it's not so a nice
 


right rewrote but it's not so a nice
cute<


cute example is elevator control that is
 


cute example is elevator control that is
also<


also in rich Sutton's book which is a
 


also in rich Sutton's book which is a
great<


great book by the way so you control the
 


great book by the way so you control the
elevator<


elevator and you think well maybe the
 


elevator and you think well maybe the
reward<


reward should be coupled to how long
 


reward should be coupled to how long
people<


people wait in front of the elevator you
 


people wait in front of the elevator you
know<


know long wait is bad you program it and
 


know long wait is bad you program it and
you<


you do it and what happens is the
 


you do it and what happens is the
elevator<


elevator eagerly picks up all the people
 


elevator eagerly picks up all the people
but<


but never drops them off maybe the time
 


but never drops them off maybe the time
in<


in the elevator also counts so you
 


in the elevator also counts so you
minimize<


minimize the sum yeah yeah in the
 


minimize the sum yeah yeah in the
elevator<


elevator does that but never picks up
 


elevator does that but never picks up
the<


the people in the tenth row in the top
 


the people in the tenth row in the top
floor<


floor because in expectation it's not
 


floor because in expectation it's not
worth<


worth it just let them stay so so even
 


worth it just let them stay so so even
in<


in apparently simple problems you can
 


in apparently simple problems you can
make<


make mistakes
 


make mistakes
you<


you know and that's what in in war
 


you know and that's what in in war
serious<


serious context say a GI safety
 


serious context say a GI safety
researchers<


researchers consider so now let's go
 


researchers consider so now let's go
back<


back to general agents so assume you
 


back to general agents so assume you
want<


want to build an agent which is
 


want to build an agent which is
generally<


generally useful to humans yes we have a
 


generally useful to humans yes we have a
household<


household robot here and it should do
 


household robot here and it should do
all<


all kinds of tasks so in this case the
 


all kinds of tasks so in this case the
human<


human should give the reward on the fly
 


human should give the reward on the fly
I<


I mean maybe it's pre trained in the
 


I mean maybe it's pre trained in the
factory<


factory and there there's some sort of
 


factory and there there's some sort of
internal<


internal reward for you know the battery
 


internal reward for you know the battery
level<


level or whatever here but so it you
 


level or whatever here but so it you
know<


know it does the dishes badly you know
 


know it does the dishes badly you know
you<


you punish the robot intercept good you
 


you punish the robot intercept good you
read<


read what the robot and then train it do
 


read what the robot and then train it do
a<


a new task you know like a child right
 


a new task you know like a child right
so<


so you need the human in the loop if you
 


so you need the human in the loop if you
want<


want a system which is useful to the
 


want a system which is useful to the
human<


human and as long as this agent stays up
 


human and as long as this agent stays up
human<


human level that should work reasonably
 


human level that should work reasonably
well<


well I'm apart from you know these
 


well I'm apart from you know these
examples<


examples it becomes critical if they
 


examples it becomes critical if they
become<


become you know on a human level it's
 


become you know on a human level it's
it's<


it's that miss children small children
 


it's that miss children small children
you<


you have reason to be well under control
 


you have reason to be well under control
they<


they become older the river technique
 


they become older the river technique
doesn't<


doesn't work so well anymore
 


doesn't work so well anymore
so<


so then finally so this would be agents
 


so then finally so this would be agents
which<


which are just you could sorry slaves to
 


which are just you could sorry slaves to
the<


the humans yeah so if you are more
 


the humans yeah so if you are more
ambitious<


ambitious and just say we want to build
 


ambitious and just say we want to build
a<


a new species of intelligent beings we
 


a new species of intelligent beings we
put<


put them on a new planet and we want
 


put them on a new planet and we want
them<


them to develop this planet or whatever
 


them to develop this planet or whatever
so<


so we don't give them any reward so what
 


so we don't give them any reward so what
could<


could we do and you could try to you
 


could we do and you could try to you
know<


know come up with some reward functions
 


know come up with some reward functions
like<


like you know it should maintain itself
 


like you know it should maintain itself
the<


the robot it should maybe multiply build
 


the robot it should maybe multiply build
more<


more robots right and you know maybe for
 


more robots right and you know maybe for
all<


all kinds of things did you find useful
 


all kinds of things did you find useful
but<


but that's pretty hard right you know
 


but that's pretty hard right you know
what<


what what the self maintenance mean you
 


what what the self maintenance mean you
know<


know what does it mean to build a copy
 


know what does it mean to build a copy
should<


should be exact copy an approximate copy
 


should be exact copy an approximate copy
and<


and so that's really hard but LaVon or
 


and so that's really hard but LaVon or
so<


so also a deep mind developed a
 


so also a deep mind developed a
beautiful<


beautiful model so it just took the aixi
 


beautiful model so it just took the aixi
model<


model and coupled the rewards to
 


model and coupled the rewards to
information<


information gained so he said the reward
 


information gained so he said the reward
is<


is proportional to how much the agent
 


is proportional to how much the agent
had<


had learned about the world and you can
 


had learned about the world and you can
rigorously<


rigorously formally uniquely define it
 


rigorously formally uniquely define it
in<


in terms of our case
 


in terms of our case
versions<


versions okay so if you put it in you
 


versions okay so if you put it in you
get<


get a completely autonomous agent and
 


get a completely autonomous agent and
actually<


actually interestingly for this agent we
 


actually interestingly for this agent we
can<


can prove much stronger result and for
 


can prove much stronger result and for
the<


the general agent which is also nice and
 


the general agent which is also nice and
if<


if you let this agent loose it will be
 


if you let this agent loose it will be
in<


in a sense the optimal scientist is this
 


in a sense the optimal scientist is this
absolutely<


absolutely curious to learn as much as
 


absolutely curious to learn as much as
possible<


possible about the world and of course
 


possible about the world and of course
it<


it will also have a lot of instrumental
 


it will also have a lot of instrumental
goals<


goals right in order to learn it needs
 


goals right in order to learn it needs
to<


to at least survive right a dead agent
 


to at least survive right a dead agent
is<


is not good for anything so it needs to
 


is not good for anything so it needs to
have<


have self-preservation and if it builds
 


have self-preservation and if it builds
small<


small helpless acquiring more
 


small helpless acquiring more
information<


information it will do that yeah if
 


information it will do that yeah if
exploration<


exploration space exploration or
 


exploration space exploration or
whatever<


whatever is necessary rights to
 


whatever is necessary rights to
gathering<


gathering information and develop it so
 


gathering information and develop it so
it<


it has a lot of instrumental goals
 


it has a lot of instrumental goals
following<


following on this information gain and
 


following on this information gain and
this<


this agent is completely autonomous of
 


this agent is completely autonomous of
us<


us no rebirth necessary anymore yeah of
 


us no rebirth necessary anymore yeah of
course<


course you could define the awaited game
 


course you could define the awaited game
the<


the concept of information it gets stuck
 


the concept of information it gets stuck
in<


in that library that you mentioned
 


in that library that you mentioned
beforehand<


beforehand with the was a very large
 


beforehand with the was a very large
number<


number of books the first agent had this
 


number of books the first agent had this
problem<


problem and it would get stuck in front
 


problem and it would get stuck in front
of<


of an old TV screen which has just said
 


of an old TV screen which has just said
white<


white noise yeah I know but the second
 


white noise yeah I know but the second
version<


version can deal with at least
 


version can deal with at least
stochasticity<


stochasticity well yeah what about
 


stochasticity well yeah what about
curiosity<


curiosity this kind of word curiosity
 


curiosity this kind of word curiosity
creativity<


creativity is that kind of the reward
 


creativity is that kind of the reward
function<


function being of getting new
 


function being of getting new
information<


information is that similar to idea of
 


information is that similar to idea of
kind<


kind of injecting exploration for its
 


kind of injecting exploration for its
own<


own sake inside the reward function do
 


own sake inside the reward function do
you<


you find this at all appealing
 


you find this at all appealing
interesting<


interesting I think that's a nice
 


interesting I think that's a nice
definition<


definition curiosity is reward sorry
 


definition curiosity is reward sorry
curiosity<


curiosity is exploration for its own
 


curiosity is exploration for its own
sake<


sake yeah I would accept that but most
 


sake yeah I would accept that but most
curiosity<


curiosity well in humans and especially
 


curiosity well in humans and especially
in<


in children yeah it's not just for its
 


in children yeah it's not just for its
own<


own sake but for actually learning about
 


own sake but for actually learning about
the<


the environment and for behaving so I
 


the environment and for behaving so I
would<


would I think most curiosity is tied in
 


would I think most curiosity is tied in
the<


the end towards performing better well
 


the end towards performing better well
okay<


okay so if intelligence systems need to
 


okay so if intelligence systems need to
have<


have the show
 


have the show
function<


function let me you're an intelligent
 


function let me you're an intelligent
system<


system currently passing the Turing test
 


system currently passing the Turing test
quite<


quite effectively what what's the reward
 


quite effectively what what's the reward
function<


function of our human intelligence
 


function of our human intelligence
existence<


existence what's the reward function
 


existence what's the reward function
that<


that Marcus hunter is operating under
 


that Marcus hunter is operating under
okay<


okay to the first question the
 


okay to the first question the
biological<


biological reward function is to survive
 


biological reward function is to survive
and<


and to spread and very few humans sort
 


and to spread and very few humans sort
of<


of are able to overcome this biological
 


of are able to overcome this biological
reward<


reward function but we live in a very
 


reward function but we live in a very
nice<


nice world where we have lots of spare
 


nice world where we have lots of spare
time<


time and can still survive and spread so
 


time and can still survive and spread so
we<


we can develop arbitrary other interests
 


we can develop arbitrary other interests
which<


which is quite interesting on top of
 


which is quite interesting on top of
that<


that that yeah but this survival and
 


that that yeah but this survival and
spreading<


spreading sort of is I would say the the
 


spreading sort of is I would say the the
goal<


goal or the reward function of human
 


goal or the reward function of human
said<


said that the core one
 


said that the core one
I<


I like how you avoided answering the
 


I like how you avoided answering the
second<


second question which a good
 


second question which a good
intelligence<


intelligence would so my that your own
 


intelligence would so my that your own
meaning<


meaning of life and the reward function
 


meaning of life and the reward function
my<


my own meaning of life and Riyad
 


my own meaning of life and Riyad
function<


function is to find an AGI to build it
 


function is to find an AGI to build it
beautifully<


beautifully put okay let's dissect Ickes
 


beautifully put okay let's dissect Ickes
even<


even further so one of the assumptions
 


even further so one of the assumptions
is<


is kind of infinity keeps creeping up
 


is kind of infinity keeps creeping up
everywhere<


everywhere which what are your thoughts
 


everywhere which what are your thoughts
and<


and kind of bounded rationality and so
 


and kind of bounded rationality and so
the<


the nature of our existence and
 


the nature of our existence and
intelligence<


intelligence systems is that we're
 


intelligence systems is that we're
operating<


operating all under constraints under
 


operating all under constraints under
you<


you know limited time limited resources
 


you know limited time limited resources
how<


how does that how do you think about
 


how does that how do you think about
that<


that with an IQ framework within trying
 


that with an IQ framework within trying
to<


to create an eg a system that operates
 


to create an eg a system that operates
under<


under these constraints yeah that is one
 


under these constraints yeah that is one
of<


of the criticisms around I could see
 


of the criticisms around I could see
that<


that it ignores computation and
 


that it ignores computation and
completely<


completely and some people believe that
 


completely and some people believe that
intelligence<


intelligence is inherently tied to
 


intelligence is inherently tied to
what's<


what's bounded resources what do you
 


what's bounded resources what do you
think<


think on this one point I think it's do
 


think on this one point I think it's do
you<


you think the boundary of resources are
 


you think the boundary of resources are
fundamental<


fundamental to intelligence I would say
 


fundamental to intelligence I would say
that<


that an intelligence notion which ignore
 


that an intelligence notion which ignore
computational<


computational limits is extremely useful
 


computational limits is extremely useful
a<


a good intelligence notion which
 


a good intelligence notion which
includes<


includes these resources would be even
 


includes these resources would be even
more<


more useful but we don't have that yet
 


more useful but we don't have that yet
and<


and so look at other fields outside of
 


and so look at other fields outside of
computer<


computer science computational aspects
 


computer science computational aspects
never<


never play a fundamental role you
 


never play a fundamental role you
develop<


develop biological models for cells
 


develop biological models for cells
something<


something in physics these theories I
 


something in physics these theories I
mean<


mean become more and more crazy and hard
 


mean become more and more crazy and hard
and<


and harder to compute well in the end of
 


and harder to compute well in the end of
course<


course we need to do something with this
 


course we need to do something with this
model<


model but this more a nuisance than a
 


model but this more a nuisance than a
feature<


feature and I'm sometimes wondering if
 


feature and I'm sometimes wondering if
artificial<


artificial intelligence would not sit in
 


artificial intelligence would not sit in
a<


a computer science department but in a
 


a computer science department but in a
philosophy<


philosophy department
 


philosophy department
then<


then this computational focus would be
 


then this computational focus would be
probably<


probably significantly less I mean think
 


probably significantly less I mean think
about<


about the induction problem is more in
 


about the induction problem is more in
the<


the philosophy department there's really
 


the philosophy department there's really
no<


no paper who cares about you know how
 


no paper who cares about you know how
long<


long it takes to compute the answer
 


long it takes to compute the answer
there<


there is completely secondary of course
 


there is completely secondary of course
once<


once we have figured out the first
 


once we have figured out the first
problem<


problem so intelligence without
 


problem so intelligence without
computational<


computational resources then the next
 


computational resources then the next
and<


and very good question is could we
 


and very good question is could we
improve<


improve it by including computational
 


improve it by including computational
resources<


resources but nobody was able to do that
 


resources but nobody was able to do that
so<


so far you know even halfway
 


so far you know even halfway
satisfactory<


satisfactory manner I like that that's
 


satisfactory manner I like that that's
in<


in the long run the right department to
 


in the long run the right department to
belong<


belong to this philosophy that's uh it's
 


belong to this philosophy that's uh it's
really<


really quite a deep idea of or even to
 


really quite a deep idea of or even to
at<


at least to think about big-picture
 


at least to think about big-picture
philosophical<


philosophical questions big-picture
 


philosophical questions big-picture
questions<


questions even in the computer science
 


questions even in the computer science
department<


department but you've mentioned
 


department but you've mentioned
approximation<


approximation sort of there's a lot of
 


approximation sort of there's a lot of
infinity<


infinity a lot of huge resources needed
 


infinity a lot of huge resources needed
are<


are there approximations - I see that
 


are there approximations - I see that
within<


within the EXCI framework that are
 


within the EXCI framework that are
useful<


useful you haven't haven't develop a
 


useful you haven't haven't develop a
couple<


couple of approximations and what we do
 


couple of approximations and what we do
there<


there is that the Sonoma of induction
 


there is that the Sonoma of induction
part<


part which was you know find the
 


part which was you know find the
shortest<


shortest program describe your data we
 


shortest program describe your data we
just<


just replace this by standard data
 


just replace this by standard data
compressors<


compressors right and the better
 


compressors right and the better
compressors<


compressors get you know the better this
 


compressors get you know the better this
part<


part will become we focus on a
 


part will become we focus on a
particular<


particular compressor called context
 


particular compressor called context
tree<


tree weighting which is
 


tree weighting which is
pretty<


pretty amazing lots of well known as
 


pretty amazing lots of well known as
beautiful<


beautiful theoretical properties also
 


beautiful theoretical properties also
works<


works reasonably well in practice so we
 


works reasonably well in practice so we
use<


use that for the approximation of the
 


use that for the approximation of the
induction<


induction in the learning in the
 


induction in the learning in the
prediction<


prediction part and from the planning
 


prediction part and from the planning
part<


part we essentially just took the ideas
 


part we essentially just took the ideas
from<


from a computer girl from 2006 I was
 


from a computer girl from 2006 I was
Java<


Java tsipras Perry also now I did mind
 


Java tsipras Perry also now I did mind
who<


who developed the so-called you sit here
 


who developed the so-called you sit here
algorithm<


algorithm upper confidence bound for
 


algorithm upper confidence bound for
trees<


trees algorithm on top of the Monte
 


trees algorithm on top of the Monte
Carlo<


Carlo tree search so they approximate is
 


Carlo tree search so they approximate is
planning<


planning part by sampling and it's
 


planning part by sampling and it's
successful<


successful on some small toy problems we
 


successful on some small toy problems we
don't<


don't want to lose the generality all
 


don't want to lose the generality all
right<


right and that's sort of the handicap
 


right and that's sort of the handicap
right<


right if you want to be general you have
 


right if you want to be general you have
to<


to give up something so but this similar
 


to give up something so but this similar
agent<


agent was able to play you know small
 


agent was able to play you know small
games<


games like cool poker and tic-tac-toe
 


games like cool poker and tic-tac-toe
and


and
 


and
and<


and even pac-man into the same
 


and even pac-man into the same
architecture<


architecture no change the agent doesn't
 


architecture no change the agent doesn't
know<


know the rules of the game really
 


know the rules of the game really
nothing<


nothing in all by self or by a player
 


nothing in all by self or by a player
with<


with these environments so your grenade
 


with these environments so your grenade
hoop<


hoop would propose something called gate
 


hoop would propose something called gate
on<


on machines which is a self-improving
 


on machines which is a self-improving
program<


program that rewrites its own code well
 


program that rewrites its own code well
sort<


sort of mathematically philosophically
 


sort of mathematically philosophically
what's<


what's the relationship in your eyes if
 


what's the relationship in your eyes if
you're<


you're familiar with it between IHC and
 


you're familiar with it between IHC and
the<


the girl machines yeah familiar with it
 


the girl machines yeah familiar with it
he<


he developed it while I was in his lab
 


he developed it while I was in his lab
you<


you know so the girl machine explained
 


you know so the girl machine explained
briefly


briefly
 


briefly
you<


you give it a task it could be a simple
 


you give it a task it could be a simple
task<


task as you know finding prime factors
 


task as you know finding prime factors
in<


in numbers right you can formally write
 


in numbers right you can formally write
it<


it down there's a very slow algorithm to
 


it down there's a very slow algorithm to
do<


do that just all try all the factors
 


do that just all try all the factors
yeah<


yeah or play chess right optimally you
 


yeah or play chess right optimally you
write<


write the algorithm to minimax to the
 


write the algorithm to minimax to the
end<


end of the game so you write down what
 


end of the game so you write down what
the<


the girdle machine should do then it
 


the girdle machine should do then it
will<


will take part of it resources to run
 


will take part of it resources to run
this<


this program and other part of the
 


this program and other part of the
sources<


sources to improve this program and when
 


sources to improve this program and when
it<


it finds an improved version which
 


it finds an improved version which
provably


provably
 


provably
it's<


it's the same answer so that's the key
 


it's the same answer so that's the key
part<


part yeah it needs to prove by itself
 


part yeah it needs to prove by itself
that<


that this change of program still
 


that this change of program still
satisfies<


satisfies the original specification and
 


satisfies the original specification and
if<


if it does so then it replaces the
 


if it does so then it replaces the
original<


original program by the improved program
 


original program by the improved program
and<


and by definition does the same job but
 


and by definition does the same job but
just<


just faster okay and then you know it
 


just faster okay and then you know it
proved<


proved over it and over it and it's it's
 


proved over it and over it and it's it's
it's<


it's developed in a way that all parts
 


it's developed in a way that all parts
of<


of this girdle machine can self improve
 


of this girdle machine can self improve
but<


but it stays provably consistent with
 


but it stays provably consistent with
the<


the original specification so from this
 


the original specification so from this
perspective<


perspective it has nothing to do with
 


perspective it has nothing to do with
aixi<


aixi but if you would now put axial as
 


aixi but if you would now put axial as
the<


the starting axioms in it would run arc
 


the starting axioms in it would run arc
C<


C but you know that takes forever but
 


C but you know that takes forever but
then<


then if it finds a provable speed-up of
 


then if it finds a provable speed-up of
Arc<


Arc C it would replace it by this and
 


Arc C it would replace it by this and
that<


that this and this and maybe eventually
 


that this and this and maybe eventually
it<


it comes up with a model which is still
 


it comes up with a model which is still
like<


like C model it cannot be I mean just
 


like C model it cannot be I mean just
for<


for the knowledgeable reader accessing
 


for the knowledgeable reader accessing
computable<


computable and there can prove that
 


computable and there can prove that
therefore<


therefore there cannot be a computable
 


therefore there cannot be a computable
exact<


exact algorithm computers there needs to
 


exact algorithm computers there needs to
be<


be some approximations and this is not
 


be some approximations and this is not
dealt<


dealt with a good machine so you have to
 


dealt with a good machine so you have to
do<


do something about it but that's the ICT
 


do something about it but that's the ICT
L<


L model which is finitely computable
 


L model which is finitely computable
which<


which we could put in which part of X is
 


which we could put in which part of X is
an<


an non computable the Solomonov
 


an non computable the Solomonov
induction<


induction part the interaction okay so
 


induction part the interaction okay so
but<


but there's ways of getting computable
 


but there's ways of getting computable
approximation<


approximation of the aixi model so then
 


approximation of the aixi model so then
it's<


it's at least computable it is still way
 


it's at least computable it is still way
beyond<


beyond any resources anybody will ever
 


beyond any resources anybody will ever
have<


have but then the girdled machine could
 


have but then the girdled machine could
sort<


sort of improve it further and further
 


sort of improve it further and further
in<


in an exact way so what this is
 


in an exact way so what this is
theoretically<


theoretically possible that the the girl
 


theoretically possible that the the girl
machine<


machine process could improve isn't
 


machine process could improve isn't
isn't<


isn't or isn't actually already optimal
 


isn't or isn't actually already optimal
it<


it is optimal in terms of the river
 


it is optimal in terms of the river
collected<


collected over its interaction cycles
 


collected over its interaction cycles
but<


but it takes infinite time to produce
 


but it takes infinite time to produce
one<


one action and the world you know
 


one action and the world you know
continues<


continues whether you want it or not
 


continues whether you want it or not
yeah<


yeah so the model is assuming had an
 


yeah so the model is assuming had an
Oracle<


Oracle which you know solve this problem
 


Oracle which you know solve this problem
and<


and then in the next hundred
 


and then in the next hundred
milliseconds<


milliseconds or
 


milliseconds or
reaction<


reaction time you need gives the answer
 


reaction time you need gives the answer
then<


then ax is optimal
 


then ax is optimal
so<


so it's optimal in sense of date are
 


so it's optimal in sense of date are
also<


also from learning efficiency and data
 


also from learning efficiency and data
efficiency<


efficiency but not in terms of
 


efficiency but not in terms of
computation<


computation time and then the other girl
 


computation time and then the other girl
machine<


machine in theory but probably not
 


machine in theory but probably not
provably<


provably could make it go faster yes ok
 


provably could make it go faster yes ok
interesting<


interesting those two components are
 


interesting those two components are
super<


super interesting the sort of the the
 


super interesting the sort of the the
perfect<


perfect intelligence combined with
 


perfect intelligence combined with
self-improvement<


self-improvement sort of provable self
 


self-improvement sort of provable self
improvement<


improvement since he always liked it
 


improvement since he always liked it
you're<


you're always getting the correct answer
 


you're always getting the correct answer
and<


and you're improving the beautiful ideas
 


and you're improving the beautiful ideas
okay<


okay so you've also mentioned that
 


okay so you've also mentioned that
different<


different kinds of things in in chase of
 


different kinds of things in in chase of
solving<


solving this reward sort of optimizing
 


solving this reward sort of optimizing
for<


for the goal interesting human things
 


for the goal interesting human things
can<


can emerge so is there a place for
 


can emerge so is there a place for
consciousness<


consciousness within IHC what where does
 


consciousness within IHC what where does
uh<


uh maybe you can comment because I
 


uh maybe you can comment because I
suppose<


suppose we humans are just another
 


suppose we humans are just another
instantiation<


instantiation Vioxx agents and we seem
 


instantiation Vioxx agents and we seem
to<


to have consciousness you say humans are
 


to have consciousness you say humans are
an<


an instantiation of Mike's agent yes oh
 


an instantiation of Mike's agent yes oh
that<


that would be amazing but I think that's
 


that would be amazing but I think that's
three<


three for the smartest and most rational
 


three for the smartest and most rational
humans<


humans I think maybe we are very crude
 


humans I think maybe we are very crude
approximation<


approximation interesting I mean I tend
 


approximation interesting I mean I tend
to<


to believe again I'm Russian so I tend
 


to believe again I'm Russian so I tend
to<


to believe our flaws are part of the
 


to believe our flaws are part of the
optimal<


optimal so the we tend to laugh off and
 


optimal so the we tend to laugh off and
criticize<


criticize our flaws and I tend to think
 


criticize our flaws and I tend to think
that<


that that's actually close to an optimal
 


that that's actually close to an optimal
behavior<


behavior but some flaws if you think
 


behavior but some flaws if you think
more<


more carefully about it are actually not
 


more carefully about it are actually not
floss<


floss yeah but I think there are still
 


floss yeah but I think there are still
enough<


enough flaws I don't know it's unclear
 


enough flaws I don't know it's unclear
as<


as a student of history I think all the
 


as a student of history I think all the
suffering<


suffering that we've been endured as a
 


suffering that we've been endured as a
civilization<


civilization it's possible that that's
 


civilization it's possible that that's
the<


the optimal amount of suffering we need
 


the optimal amount of suffering we need
to<


to endure to minimize the long-term
 


to endure to minimize the long-term
suffering<


suffering that's your Russian background
 


suffering that's your Russian background
that's<


that's the Russian weather whoo humans
 


that's the Russian weather whoo humans
are<


are or not instantiation of an AI agent
 


are or not instantiation of an AI agent
do<


do you think there's a consciousness of
 


do you think there's a consciousness of
something<


something that could emerge in the
 


something that could emerge in the
no<


no formal framework like IHC let me also
 


no formal framework like IHC let me also
ask<


ask you a question do you think I'm
 


ask you a question do you think I'm
conscious<


conscious that's a good question you
 


conscious that's a good question you
you're<


you're that that tie is confusing me but
 


you're that that tie is confusing me but
I<


I think you think it makes me
 


I think you think it makes me
unconscious<


unconscious because it strangles me if
 


unconscious because it strangles me if
if<


if an agent were to solve the imitation
 


if an agent were to solve the imitation
game<


game posed by touring I think they would
 


game posed by touring I think they would
be<


be dressed similarly to you that because
 


be dressed similarly to you that because
there's<


there's a there's a kind of flamboyant
 


there's a there's a kind of flamboyant
interesting<


interesting complex behavior pattern
 


interesting complex behavior pattern
that<


that sells that you're human and you're
 


that sells that you're human and you're
cautious<


cautious but why do you ask was it a yes
 


cautious but why do you ask was it a yes
always<


always gonna know yes I think you're
 


always gonna know yes I think you're
conscious<


conscious yes yeah so and you explain
 


conscious yes yeah so and you explain
sort<


sort of somehow why
 


sort of somehow why
but<


but you infer that from my behavior
 


but you infer that from my behavior
right<


right yeah you can never be sure about
 


right yeah you can never be sure about
that<


that and I think the same thing will
 


that and I think the same thing will
happen<


happen with any intelligent way to be
 


happen with any intelligent way to be
developed<


developed if it behaves in a way
 


developed if it behaves in a way
sufficiently<


sufficiently close to humans or maybe if
 


sufficiently close to humans or maybe if
not<


not humans I mean you know maybe a dog
 


not humans I mean you know maybe a dog
is<


is also sometimes a little bit
 


is also sometimes a little bit
self-conscious<


self-conscious right so so if it behaves
 


self-conscious right so so if it behaves
in<


in a way where we attribute typically
 


in a way where we attribute typically
consciousness<


consciousness we would actually build
 


consciousness we would actually build
consciousness<


consciousness to this intelligent
 


consciousness to this intelligent
systems<


systems and you know except all in
 


systems and you know except all in
particular<


particular that of course doesn't answer
 


particular that of course doesn't answer
the<


the question whether it's really
 


the question whether it's really
conscious<


conscious and that's the you know the
 


conscious and that's the you know the
big<


big hard problem of consciousness you
 


big hard problem of consciousness you
know<


know maybe I'm a zombie I mean not the
 


know maybe I'm a zombie I mean not the
movie<


movie zombie but the philosophical
 


movie zombie but the philosophical
zombie<


zombie it's to you the display of
 


zombie it's to you the display of
consciousness<


consciousness close enough to
 


consciousness close enough to
consciousness<


consciousness from a perspective of a GI
 


consciousness from a perspective of a GI
that<


that the distinction of the hard problem
 


that the distinction of the hard problem
of<


of consciousness is not an interesting
 


of consciousness is not an interesting
one<


one I think we don't have to worry about
 


one I think we don't have to worry about
the<


the consciousness problem especially the
 


the consciousness problem especially the
heart<


heart problem for developing a GI I
 


heart problem for developing a GI I
think<


think you know we progress at some point
 


think you know we progress at some point
we<


we have solved all the technical
 


we have solved all the technical
problems<


problems and this system will behave
 


problems and this system will behave
intelligent<


intelligent and then super intelligent
 


intelligent and then super intelligent
and<


and this consciousness will emerge I
 


and this consciousness will emerge I
mean<


mean definitely it will display behavior
 


mean definitely it will display behavior
which<


which we will interpret as conscious and
 


which we will interpret as conscious and
then<


then it's a philosophical question did
 


then it's a philosophical question did
this<


this consciousness really emerge or is
 


this consciousness really emerge or is
zombie<


zombie which just you know fakes
 


zombie which just you know fakes
everything<


everything we still don't have to figure
 


everything we still don't have to figure
that<


that out although it may be interesting
 


that out although it may be interesting
at<


at least from a philosophical point of
 


at least from a philosophical point of
it's<


it's very interesting but it may also be
 


it's very interesting but it may also be
sort<


sort of practically interesting you know
 


sort of practically interesting you know
there's<


there's some people say you know if it's
 


there's some people say you know if it's
just<


just faking consciousness and feelings
 


just faking consciousness and feelings
you<


you know then we don't need to have be
 


you know then we don't need to have be
concerned<


concerned about you know rights but if
 


concerned about you know rights but if
it's<


it's real conscious and has feelings
 


it's real conscious and has feelings
then<


then we need to be concerned yeah I
 


then we need to be concerned yeah I
can't<


can't wait til the day where AI systems
 


can't wait til the day where AI systems
exhibit<


exhibit consciousness because it'll
 


exhibit consciousness because it'll
truly<


truly be some of the hardest ethical
 


truly be some of the hardest ethical
questions<


questions how well we do with that it is
 


questions how well we do with that it is
rather<


rather easy to build systems which
 


rather easy to build systems which
people<


people ascribe consciousness and I give
 


people ascribe consciousness and I give
you<


you an analogy I mean remember maybe
 


you an analogy I mean remember maybe
once<


once before you were born the Tamagotchi
 


once before you were born the Tamagotchi
yes<


yes how dare you sir you're young right
 


yes how dare you sir you're young right
yes<


yes it's good thing yeah thank you thank
 


yes it's good thing yeah thank you thank
you<


you very much but I was also in the so
 


you very much but I was also in the so
you<


you have any of those funny things but
 


you have any of those funny things but
you<


you have heard about this time ago it
 


you have heard about this time ago it
was<


was you know really really primitive
 


was you know really really primitive
actually<


actually for the time it was and you
 


actually for the time it was and you
know<


know you could race you know this and
 


know you could race you know this and
and<


and and and kids got so attached to it
 


and and and kids got so attached to it
and<


and you know didn't want to let it die
 


and you know didn't want to let it die
and<


and would have probably if we would have
 


and would have probably if we would have
asked<


asked you know the children know do you
 


asked you know the children know do you
think<


think this drama coach is conscious and
 


think this drama coach is conscious and
they<


they would say yes yes I was yes that's
 


they would say yes yes I was yes that's
kind<


kind of a beautiful thing actually
 


kind of a beautiful thing actually
because<


because that consciousness ascribing
 


because that consciousness ascribing
consciousness<


consciousness seems to create a deeper
 


consciousness seems to create a deeper
connection<


connection yeah which is a powerful
 


connection yeah which is a powerful
thing<


thing but we have to be careful on the
 


thing but we have to be careful on the
ethics<


ethics side of that well let me ask
 


ethics side of that well let me ask
about<


about the AGI community broadly you kind
 


about the AGI community broadly you kind
of<


of represent some of the most serious
 


of represent some of the most serious
work<


work on a giass of at least or earlier
 


work on a giass of at least or earlier
and<


and deepmind represents a serious work
 


and deepmind represents a serious work
on<


on AGI these days but why in your sense
 


on AGI these days but why in your sense
is<


is the AGI communities so small or has
 


is the AGI communities so small or has
been<


been so small until maybe deep mine came
 


been so small until maybe deep mine came
along<


along like why why aren't more people
 


along like why why aren't more people
seriously<


seriously working on human level and
 


seriously working on human level and
super<


super human level intelligence from a
 


super human level intelligence from a
formal<


formal perspective okay from a formal
 


formal perspective okay from a formal
perspective<


perspective that sort of you know and an
 


perspective that sort of you know and an
extra<


extra point so I think
 


extra point so I think
a couple<


a couple of reasons I mean AI came in
 


a couple of reasons I mean AI came in
waves<


waves right you know our interest in our
 


waves right you know our interest in our
summers<


summers and then there were big promises
 


summers and then there were big promises
which<


which were not fulfilled and people got
 


which were not fulfilled and people got
disappointed<


disappointed and that narrow AI are sold
 


disappointed and that narrow AI are sold
in<


in particular problems which seem to
 


in particular problems which seem to
require<


require intelligence was always to some
 


require intelligence was always to some
extent<


extent successful and there were
 


extent successful and there were
improvements<


improvements small steps and if you
 


improvements small steps and if you
build<


build something which is you know useful
 


build something which is you know useful
for<


for society or industrial useful then
 


for society or industrial useful then
there's<


there's a lot of funding so I guess it
 


there's a lot of funding so I guess it
wasn't<


wasn't pass the money which drives
 


wasn't pass the money which drives
people<


people to develop specific system
 


people to develop specific system
solving<


solving specific tasks but you would
 


solving specific tasks but you would
think<


think that you know at least on
 


think that you know at least on
university<


university you should be able to do
 


university you should be able to do
ivory<


ivory tower research and that was
 


ivory tower research and that was
probably<


probably better a long time ago about
 


probably better a long time ago about
even<


even nowadays there's quite some
 


even nowadays there's quite some
pressure<


pressure off of doing applied research
 


pressure off of doing applied research
or<


or translational research and you know
 


or translational research and you know
it's<


it's harder to get grants as a theorist
 


it's harder to get grants as a theorist
so<


so that also drives people away it's
 


so that also drives people away it's
maybe<


maybe also harder attacking the general
 


maybe also harder attacking the general
intelligence<


intelligence problem so I think enough
 


intelligence problem so I think enough
people<


people I mean maybe a small number we're
 


people I mean maybe a small number we're
still<


still interested in in formalizing
 


still interested in in formalizing
intelligence<


intelligence and thinking of general
 


intelligence and thinking of general
intelligence<


intelligence but you know not much came
 


intelligence but you know not much came
up<


up right or not much great stuff came up
 


up right or not much great stuff came up
so<


so what do you think we talked about the
 


so what do you think we talked about the
formal<


formal big light at the end of the
 


formal big light at the end of the
tunnel<


tunnel but from the engineering
 


tunnel but from the engineering
perspective<


perspective what do you think it takes
 


perspective what do you think it takes
to<


to build an a GI system is it and I
 


to build an a GI system is it and I
don't<


don't know if that's a stupid question
 


don't know if that's a stupid question
or<


or a distinct question from everything
 


or a distinct question from everything
we've<


we've been talking about I exceed but
 


we've been talking about I exceed but
what<


what do you see as the steps that are
 


what do you see as the steps that are
necessary<


necessary to take to start to try to
 


necessary to take to start to try to
build<


build something so you wanted a blue
 


build something so you wanted a blue
print<


print now and then you go and do it it's
 


print now and then you go and do it it's
the<


the whole point of this conversation try
 


the whole point of this conversation try
to<


to squeeze that in there now is there I
 


to squeeze that in there now is there I
mean<


mean what's your intuition is it is in
 


mean what's your intuition is it is in
the<


the robotic space or something that has
 


the robotic space or something that has
a<


a body and tries to explore the world is
 


a body and tries to explore the world is
in<


in the reinforcement learning space like
 


in the reinforcement learning space like
the<


the efforts of the alpha 0 and alpha
 


the efforts of the alpha 0 and alpha
star<


star they're kind of exploring how you
 


star they're kind of exploring how you
can<


can solve it through in in the
 


can solve it through in in the
simulation<


simulation in the gaming world
 


simulation in the gaming world
their<


their stuff and sort of the of the
 


their stuff and sort of the of the
transformer<


transformer working natural English
 


transformer working natural English
processing<


processing so maybe attacking the open
 


processing so maybe attacking the open
domain<


domain dialog like what where do you see
 


domain dialog like what where do you see
a<


a promising pathways let me pick the
 


a promising pathways let me pick the
embodiment<


embodiment maybe so embodiment is
 


embodiment maybe so embodiment is
important<


important yes and no I don't believe
 


important yes and no I don't believe
that<


that we need a physical robots walking
 


that we need a physical robots walking
or<


or rolling around interacting with the
 


or rolling around interacting with the
real<


real world in order to achieve AGI and I
 


real world in order to achieve AGI and I
think<


think it's more of a distraction
 


think it's more of a distraction
probably<


probably than helpful it's sort of
 


probably than helpful it's sort of
confusing<


confusing the body with the mind for
 


confusing the body with the mind for
industrial<


industrial applications or near-term
 


industrial applications or near-term
applications<


applications of course we need robotics
 


applications of course we need robotics
for<


for all kinds of things yeah but for
 


for all kinds of things yeah but for
solving<


solving the big problem at least at this
 


solving the big problem at least at this
stage<


stage I think it's not necessary but the
 


stage I think it's not necessary but the
answer<


answer is also yes that I think the most
 


answer is also yes that I think the most
promising<


promising approaches that you have an
 


promising approaches that you have an
agent<


agent and you know there can be a
 


agent and you know there can be a
virtual<


virtual agent you know you know computer
 


virtual agent you know you know computer
interacting<


interacting with an environment possibly
 


interacting with an environment possibly
in<


in our 3d simulated environment like in
 


in our 3d simulated environment like in
many<


many computer games and and you train
 


many computer games and and you train
and<


and learn the agent even if you don't
 


and learn the agent even if you don't
intend<


intend to later put it sort of you know
 


intend to later put it sort of you know
this<


this algorithm in a robot brain and
 


this algorithm in a robot brain and
leave<


leave it forever in the virtual reality
 


leave it forever in the virtual reality
getting<


getting experience in a also it's just
 


getting experience in a also it's just
simulated<


simulated 3d world is possibly and I say
 


simulated 3d world is possibly and I say
possibly<


possibly important to understand things
 


possibly important to understand things
on<


on a similar level as humans do
 


on a similar level as humans do
especially<


especially if the agent or primarily if
 


especially if the agent or primarily if
the<


the agent wants needs to interact with
 


the agent wants needs to interact with
the<


the humans right you know if you talk
 


the humans right you know if you talk
about<


about objects on top of each other in
 


about objects on top of each other in
space<


space and flying and cars and so on and
 


space and flying and cars and so on and
the<


the agent has no experience with even
 


the agent has no experience with even
virtual<


virtual 3d worlds it's probably hard to
 


virtual 3d worlds it's probably hard to
grasp<


grasp so if you develop an abstract
 


grasp so if you develop an abstract
agent<


agent say we take the mathematical path
 


agent say we take the mathematical path
and<


and we just want to build an agent which
 


and we just want to build an agent which
can<


can prove theorems and becomes a better
 


can prove theorems and becomes a better
imitation<


imitation then this agent needs to be
 


imitation then this agent needs to be
able<


able to reason in very abstract spaces
 


able to reason in very abstract spaces
and<


and then maybe sort of putting it into
 


and then maybe sort of putting it into
3d<


3d environment simulated alt is even
 


3d environment simulated alt is even
harmful<


harmful it should sort of you put it in
 


harmful it should sort of you put it in
I<


I don't know an environment which it
 


I don't know an environment which it
creates<


creates itself or so it seems like you
 


creates itself or so it seems like you
have<


have an interesting rich complex
 


have an interesting rich complex
trajectory<


trajectory through life in terms of your
 


trajectory through life in terms of your
journey<


journey of ideas so it's interesting to
 


journey of ideas so it's interesting to
ask<


ask what books technical fiction
 


ask what books technical fiction
philosophical<


philosophical and books ideas people had
 


philosophical and books ideas people had
a<


a transformative effect books are most
 


a transformative effect books are most
interesting<


interesting because maybe people could
 


interesting because maybe people could
also<


also read those books and see if they
 


also read those books and see if they
could<


could be inspired as well you're luckily
 


could be inspired as well you're luckily
asked<


asked books and not singular book it's
 


asked books and not singular book it's
very<


very hard and I tried to pin down one
 


very hard and I tried to pin down one
book<


book yeah then I can do that at the end
 


book yeah then I can do that at the end
so<


so the most the books which were most
 


so the most the books which were most
transformative<


transformative for me or which I can
 


transformative for me or which I can
most<


most highly recommend to people
 


most highly recommend to people
interested<


interested in AI both perhaps yeah I
 


interested in AI both perhaps yeah I
would<


would always start with Russell and
 


would always start with Russell and
Norvig<


Norvig artificial intelligence a modern
 


Norvig artificial intelligence a modern
approach<


approach that's the AI Bible it's an
 


approach that's the AI Bible it's an
amazing<


amazing book it's very broad it covers
 


amazing book it's very broad it covers
you<


you know all approaches to AI and even
 


you know all approaches to AI and even
if<


if you focus on one approach I think
 


if you focus on one approach I think
that<


that is the minimum you should know
 


that is the minimum you should know
about<


about the other approaches out there so
 


about the other approaches out there so
that<


that should be your first book
 


that should be your first book
fourth<


fourth edition should be coming out soon
 


fourth edition should be coming out soon
okay<


okay interesting deeper there's a deep
 


okay interesting deeper there's a deep
learning<


learning chapter now so there must be
 


learning chapter now so there must be
written<


written by Ian good fella okay and then
 


written by Ian good fella okay and then
the<


the next book I would recommend the
 


the next book I would recommend the
reinforcement<


reinforcement only book by certain in
 


reinforcement only book by certain in
part<


part oh there's a beautiful book if
 


part oh there's a beautiful book if
there's<


there's any problem with the book
 


there's any problem with the book
it<


it makes our L feel and look much easier
 


it makes our L feel and look much easier
than<


than it actually is it's very gentle
 


than it actually is it's very gentle
book<


book it's very nice to read the
 


book it's very nice to read the
exercises<


exercises do you can very quickly you
 


exercises do you can very quickly you
know<


know get some aerial systems to run you
 


know get some aerial systems to run you
know<


know on very toy problems but it's a lot
 


know on very toy problems but it's a lot
of<


of fun and you in very in a couple of
 


of fun and you in very in a couple of
days<


days you feel you know you know what RL
 


days you feel you know you know what RL
is<


is about but it's much harder than the
 


is about but it's much harder than the
book<


book yeah
 


book yeah
come<


come on now it's an awesome book yeah
 


come on now it's an awesome book yeah
that<


that idea's yeah and maybe I mean
 


that idea's yeah and maybe I mean
there's<


there's so many books out there if you
 


there's so many books out there if you
like<


like the information theoretic approach
 


like the information theoretic approach
then<


then there's Kolmogorov complexity by
 


then there's Kolmogorov complexity by
Alene<


Alene batani but probably you know some
 


Alene batani but probably you know some
some<


some short article is enough you don't
 


some short article is enough you don't
need<


need to read a whole book but it's a
 


need to read a whole book but it's a
great<


great book and if you have to mention
 


great book and if you have to mention
one<


one all-time favorite book so different
 


one all-time favorite book so different
flavor<


flavor that's a book which is used in
 


flavor that's a book which is used in
the<


the International Baccalaureate for high
 


the International Baccalaureate for high
school<


school students in several countries
 


school students in several countries
that's<


that's from Nicolas alchun theory of
 


that's from Nicolas alchun theory of
knowledge<


knowledge second edition or first not
 


knowledge second edition or first not
assert<


assert least the third one they put they
 


assert least the third one they put they
took<


took out all the fun okay so this asked
 


took out all the fun okay so this asked
all<


all the interesting or to me interesting
 


all the interesting or to me interesting
philosophical<


philosophical questions about how we
 


philosophical questions about how we
acquire<


acquire knowledge from all perspectives
 


acquire knowledge from all perspectives
on<


on from math from art from physics and
 


on from math from art from physics and
ask<


ask how can we know I'm anything and
 


ask how can we know I'm anything and
book<


book is called theory of knowledge from
 


book is called theory of knowledge from
which<


which is almost like a philosophical
 


which is almost like a philosophical
exploration<


exploration of how we get knowledge from
 


exploration of how we get knowledge from
anything<


anything yes yeah I mean can religion
 


anything yes yeah I mean can religion
tell<


tell us you know about something about
 


tell us you know about something about
the<


the world can science tell us something
 


the world can science tell us something
about<


about the world can mathematics so as
 


about the world can mathematics so as
it's<


it's just playing with symbols and
 


it's just playing with symbols and
onions


onions
 


onions
open-ended<


open-ended questions and I mean it's for
 


open-ended questions and I mean it's for
high<


high school students so they have been
 


high school students so they have been
resources<


resources from Hitchhiker's Guide to the
 


resources from Hitchhiker's Guide to the
galaxy<


galaxy and from Star Wars and the
 


galaxy and from Star Wars and the
chicken<


chicken cross the road
 


chicken cross the road
yeah<


yeah and it's it's it's fun to read and
 


yeah and it's it's it's fun to read and
but<


but it's also quite deep if you could
 


but it's also quite deep if you could
live<


live one day of your life over again
 


live one day of your life over again
because<


because it made you truly happy or maybe
 


because it made you truly happy or maybe
like<


like we said with the books it was truly
 


like we said with the books it was truly
transformative<


transformative what what day what moment
 


transformative what what day what moment
would<


would you choose there's something pop
 


would you choose there's something pop
into<


into your mind doesn't need to be a day
 


into your mind doesn't need to be a day
in<


in the past or can it be a day in the
 


in the past or can it be a day in the
future


future
 


future
well<


well space-time is an emergent phenomena
 


well space-time is an emergent phenomena
so<


so it's all the same anyway
 


so it's all the same anyway
okay<


okay okay from the past you're really
 


okay okay from the past you're really
good<


good saved from the future I love it no
 


good saved from the future I love it no
I<


I will also tell you from the future
 


I will also tell you from the future
okay<


okay from the past I would say
 


okay from the past I would say
when<


when I discovered Maxim Allah I mean it
 


when I discovered Maxim Allah I mean it
was<


was not in one day but it was one
 


was not in one day but it was one
moment<


moment they are realized comig of
 


moment they are realized comig of
complexity<


complexity and didn't even know that it
 


complexity and didn't even know that it
existed<


existed but I rediscovered sort of this
 


existed but I rediscovered sort of this
compression<


compression idea myself but immediately
 


compression idea myself but immediately
I<


I knew I can't be the first one but I
 


I knew I can't be the first one but I
had<


had this idea and then I knew about
 


had this idea and then I knew about
sequential<


sequential decision ray and I knew if I
 


sequential decision ray and I knew if I
put<


put it together this is the right thing
 


put it together this is the right thing
and<


and yeah I'm still when I think back
 


and yeah I'm still when I think back
about<


about this moment I'm I'm super excited
 


about this moment I'm I'm super excited
about<


about it was there
 


about it was there
was<


was there any more details and context
 


was there any more details and context
that<


that moment did an apple fall in your
 


that moment did an apple fall in your
head<


head were so like if you look at en
 


head were so like if you look at en
Goodfellow<


Goodfellow talking about Gans there was
 


Goodfellow talking about Gans there was
beer<


beer involved there is there some more
 


beer involved there is there some more
context<


context of what sparked your thought it
 


context of what sparked your thought it
was<


was a jest and no it was much more
 


was a jest and no it was much more
mundane<


mundane so I've worked in this company
 


mundane so I've worked in this company
so<


so in this sense the four and a half
 


so in this sense the four and a half
years<


years was not completely wasted so and
 


years was not completely wasted so and
I've<


I've worked on an image interpolation
 


I've worked on an image interpolation
problem<


problem and I developed a quite neat new
 


problem and I developed a quite neat new
interpolation<


interpolation techniques and they got
 


interpolation techniques and they got
patented<


patented and then I you know and which
 


patented and then I you know and which
happens<


happens quite often I got sort of
 


happens quite often I got sort of
overboard<


overboard and thought about you know
 


overboard and thought about you know
yeah<


yeah that's pretty good but it's not the
 


yeah that's pretty good but it's not the
best<


best so what is the best possible way of
 


best so what is the best possible way of
doing<


doing in the interpolation and then I
 


doing in the interpolation and then I
thought<


thought yeah you you want the simplest
 


thought yeah you you want the simplest
picture<


picture which is if you cross train it
 


picture which is if you cross train it
recovers<


recovers your original picture and then
 


recovers your original picture and then
I<


I you know thought about the simplicity
 


I you know thought about the simplicity
concept<


concept more in quantitative terms and
 


concept more in quantitative terms and
you<


you know then everything developed and
 


you know then everything developed and
somehow<


somehow love the full beautiful mix of
 


somehow love the full beautiful mix of
also<


also being a physicist and thinking
 


also being a physicist and thinking
about<


about the big picture of it then led you
 


about the big picture of it then led you
to<


to probably the end of a good idea so as
 


to probably the end of a good idea so as
a<


a physicist I was probably trained not
 


a physicist I was probably trained not
to<


to always think in computational terms
 


to always think in computational terms
you<


you know just ignore that and think
 


you know just ignore that and think
about<


about the other two the fundamental
 


about the other two the fundamental
properties<


properties which you want to have so
 


properties which you want to have so
what<


what about if you could really one day
 


what about if you could really one day
in<


in the future all the day what would
 


in the future all the day what would
that<


that be when I solve the AGI problem and
 


that be when I solve the AGI problem and
I<


I bring the practice in practice so in
 


I bring the practice in practice so in
theory<


theory I have solved it that I see what
 


theory I have solved it that I see what
already<


already attracted me and then ask the
 


already attracted me and then ask the
first<


first question or would be the first
 


first question or would be the first
question<


question what's the meaning of life
 


question what's the meaning of life
I<


I don't think there's a better way to
 


I don't think there's a better way to
end<


end it thank you so much for talking it
 


end it thank you so much for talking it
is<


is a huge honor to finally meet you yeah
 


is a huge honor to finally meet you yeah
thank<


thank you - I was a pleasure off my side
 


thank you - I was a pleasure off my side
-<


- thanks for listening to this
 


- thanks for listening to this
conversation<


conversation with Marcus hunter and
 


conversation with Marcus hunter and
thank<


thank you to our presenting sponsor cash
 


thank you to our presenting sponsor cash
app<


app downloaded you just cold legs
 


app downloaded you just cold legs
podcast<


podcast you'll get ten dollars and ten
 


podcast you'll get ten dollars and ten
dollars<


dollars will go to first an organization
 


dollars will go to first an organization
that<


that inspires and educates young minds
 


that inspires and educates young minds
to<


to become science and technology
 


to become science and technology
innovators<


innovators of tomorrow if you enjoy this
 


innovators of tomorrow if you enjoy this
podcast<


podcast subscribe on YouTube give it
 


podcast subscribe on YouTube give it
five<


five stars an apple podcast supported on
 


five stars an apple podcast supported on
patreon<


patreon or simply connect with me on
 


patreon or simply connect with me on
Twitter<


Twitter at Lex Friedman and now let me
 


Twitter at Lex Friedman and now let me
leave<


leave you with some words of wisdom from
 


leave you with some words of wisdom from
Albert<


Albert Einstein the measure of
 


Albert Einstein the measure of
intelligence<


 
 


 
for<


for listening and hope to see you next
 


for listening and hope to see you next
time


 
 


 
you

